  
 Biometric Identification Using 
Photoplethysmography Signal 
 
Aya Al-Sidani, Bilal Ibrahim, Ali Cherry, Mohamad Hajj-Hassan 
Electronics engineering/Emphasis on biomedical engineering  
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
11330247@students.liu.edu.lb, 11230199@students.liu.edu.lb, ali.cherry@liu.edu.lb, Mohamad.hajjhassan@liu.edu.lb  
 
 
Abstract—Due to the increase in the importance of the electronic 
data nowadays, finding a way to protect this data from hacking 
became a must. In this paper, the Photoplethysmographic signal 
known as the PPG signal is used as a biometric technique due to its 
several advantages, most importantly its unique form that differs 
between individuals. The PPG signal is taken using the Spo2 sensor 
which is a non-invasive method used for measuring the oxygen 
saturation from either the finger or the ear using 2 light emitting 
diodes (LEDs); using this PPG signal and its 2 derivatives 40 
features depending on the signals’ dimensions were extracted by 
Matlab, and then the K-nearest neighbor classifier was applied after 
tuning 2 parameters (the constant k and the distance metric) to check 
the efficiency of this method. The proposed algorithm was tested on 
dataset having signals previously processed. In future work, this 
technique is going to be implemented to unlock computers instead of 
using a password. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
With the progress in the technology, people tried to find 
more secure ways for authentication in many applications such 
as banking, protecting their properties and data… Earlier, the 
only ways for authentication were keys, cards, passwords, 
PINs, but these are found to be of low security since the keys 
and cards can be either missed or robbed, similarly the 
passwords and PINs can be forgotten, guessed or hacked 
through software. For these reasons, new techniques were 
discovered which are the biometric techniques and are used 
widely in the world to provide high security.  
The biometric techniques are measurements based on 
physiological or behavioral traits in the individual; these traits 
should be unique, quantitative, global and invariant over long 
periods and the system used to extract these features should be 
precise, real-time, user-friendly, and resistive to spoofing [1]. 
Another important characteristic in a biometric system is its 
ability to detect if the sample belongs to a living being or is 
stolen from a dead person; some techniques were able to 
accomplish this liveness detection while others are still facing 
some fooling techniques and need improvement. 
Biometric techniques consist of 2 steps, first the 
admission of the data where the patterns and templates are 
saved in the database known as the enrollment stage, second 
the examination where each acquired pattern is matched with 
the archived templates after extracting specific features from it 
according to specific methods [2]. Biometric systems are used 
for 2 applications; the verification application is used to prove 
someone’s identity by matching the acquired features only by 
this person’s stored template this is known as the positive 
recognition (one-to-one matching), whereas the identification 
application or the negative recognition is used to identify an 
individual by comparing his/her template with all the 
templates stored in the database (one-to-many matching) [1]. 
 The proposed design in this paper is based on the Spo2 
sensor that provides liveness detection since the signal needed 
for feature extraction, the oxygen saturation, and heart rate 
cannot be taken except from a living person; this trait makes 
this technique very difficult to be spoofed. The system used is 
made up by inexpensive components, provides high accuracy, 
and is considered nonintrusive for users since it requires only 
the contact with one finger, operates in real-time and is not 
affected by environmental conditions such as light, noise… 
Finally, it provides an additional feature for improving 
security since the photoplethysmogram signal change with 
psychological conditions, the individual cannot be taken as a 
hostage and be forced to use his signal because the system will 
not recognize the individual unless he/she was in a relaxed 
mode. 
II. RELATED WORKS 
Biometric techniques are used worldwide in many 
applications; each technique has its advantages and drawbacks. 
There are many techniques such as the fingerprint, 2D and 3D 
face recognition, iris recognition, retina recognition, vein 
pattern, hand geometry, palm print, DNA, voice recognition, 
signature dynamics, gait behavior… only the most used ones 
are discussed in this paper. 
A. Fingerprint 
The fingerprint was and still is one of the most popular 
biometric techniques used due to its high accuracy and ease of 
ISBN: 978-1-5386-2742-6/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
12
use. It is characterized by the arrangement of the ridges and 
valleys found on the fingers, the fingerprint is so precise that it 
is different between identical twins and between the fingers of 
one person [1]. One of the problems still facing the fingerprint 
method is the tendency of the fingerprint to change with age 
and environmental factors, also a big sector of people doesn’t 
feel comfortable in being in direct contact with the sensor 
already touched by people before them [1][2]. Another 
problem is the ability in fooling some fingerprint readers easily 
if it didn’t include a liveness detection technique. 
B. Face Recognition 
      The artificial face recognition technique can be 2D or 3D, 
this technique demands several conditions on the process of 
acquiring the image like keeping the surrounding and 
lightening clear, the more excellent the camera is, and the 
more precise the outcome will be. This method has a major 
drawback which is its variation with age and changes in 
appearance; also it is affected by the light and view angle [1].  
C. Iris and Retina Recognition  
      The pattern in the iris is highly specialized, such that it 
differs between identical twins and between the 2 eyes of one 
individual; consequently, this technique is very accurate. Also, 
the iris recognition technique is not annoying for the users and 
is widely accepted more than the retina recognition technique 
due to its intrusiveness. However, the procedure done to 
implement the iris image is complicated; also the size of the 
pupil can vary greatly due to the lightening circumstances [2]. 
       On the other hand, the retina pattern is constant in all the 
lifespan of the individual, however, it is highly intrusive for 
users and it requires an expensive apparatus [2].  
III. METHODOLOGY 
          The aim of this paper is to design a biometric method 
using the Spo2 sensor by extracting 40 features from the 
signal and its derivatives and then applying the K-NN 
classifier. 
A. Spo2 Sensor 
The SpO2 sensor is a non-invasive method that 
measures the oxygen saturation which shows the amount of 
oxygen that is being carried by the hemoglobin; it also 
measures the heart rate and gives a photoplethysmogram 
waveform by being placed on the finger of the individual. 
The SpO2 sensor as shown in Figure 1 contains 2 light 
sources (LEDs); they emit red and infrared signals with 
660nm and 940nm respectively since the absorption trait of 
the hemoglobin differs with respect to its synthetic binding 
and the wavelength of the light sent. The non-oxygenated 
hemoglobin 
absorbs 
red light 
(660nm) 
whereas 
the 
oxygenated hemoglobin absorbs infrared light (940nm). These 
signals pass through the blood vessels in the finger where only 
the unabsorbed ones reach the photodetector on the opposing 
side of the sensor; these signals are then sent back to the 
monitor for processing where the oxygen saturation is 
calculated and displayed. 
 
Fig. 1: SpO2 sensor 
B. Photoplethysmographic Signal  
When the infrared and red light passes through the 
finger, they are not only absorbed by the blood vessels, but 
they are absorbed, scattered and reflected by other tissues, 
bones, skin, and arterial and venous blood. This leads to a 
photoplethysmogram waveform having both AC and DC 
components as shown in Figure 2; since the arterial blood is 
pulsatile and acquire AC components it can be extracted from 
the non-pulsatile blood and other tissues that acquire DC 
components.  
The resulting signal has a unique form that differs 
between individuals which made it a good cause to be used as 
a biometric technique after extracting its features. It consists 
of 2 peaks, the first one is the systolic peak followed by a 
dicrotic notch and then the diastolic peak as shown in Figure 
3.   
C. Feature Extraction  
The dataset used for feature extraction and 
classification was taken from the Vortal Study, National 
Clinical Trial no. 01472133, it consists of 57 subjects; 41 
subjects belong to young people having ages between 18 and 
40 years and 16 subjects to old people having ages above 70 
years. All participants were healthy and no important 
distinction was found between female and male subjects. The 
data was collected for a period of 10 minutes where the 
participants rested down in a flat position and the PPG signals 
were taken from either the ear or the finger showing no 
difference in the signals between the ear and the finger [3]. 
Before the features were extracted, the first and second 
derivatives of the signal were computed and then 40 features 
were extracted using Matlab [4]. The features are shown in 
Figure 4 and Figure 5 
 
• From the PPG signal: Systolic peak/amplitude (x), 
diastolic peak/amplitude (y), dicrotic notch amplitude 
(z), pulse interval (tpi), peak to peak interval (tpp), 
systolic peak time (t1), dicrotic notch time (t2), diastolic 
peak time (t3), time between systolic and diastolic 
peaks (∆T), mean, variance, standard deviation. 
• From its derivatives: The following points were located: 
from the first derivative (a1, b1, e1, and f1) and from 
the second derivative (a2, b2, e2, and f2), then the 
following feature were extracted: ta1, tb1, te1, tf1, ta2, 
and tb2. 
ISBN: 978-1-5386-2742-6/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
13
• Calculated ratios: Augmentation index (y/x) and 
alternative augmentation index((x-y)/x), systolic peak 
output curve (t1/x), diastolic peak downward curve 
(y/(tpi-t3)), b2/a2, e2/a2 and (b2+c2)/a2, other ratios: 
t1/tpp, t2/tpp, t3/tpp, ∆T/tpp, ta1/tpp, tb1/tpp, te1/tpp, 
tf1/tpp, ta2/tpp, tb2/tpp, (ta1-ta2) /tpp, (tb1-tb2) /tpp, 
(te1-te2) /tpp, (tf1-tf2) /tpp. 
 
Fig. 2: AC/DC components of the signal 
           
 
Fig. 3: The PPG signal 
 
 
Fig. 4: Features extracted from the PPG signal 
 
 
Fig. 5: Features extracted from the signal's derivatives 
D. Classification 
Data mining is the mechanism for finding a specific 
arrangement or template out of large data; Classification is one 
of the important data mining techniques; it is the process that 
estimates and forecasts the class or the category of a specific 
data. There are many classification techniques such as neural 
network, support vector machine, K-nearest neighbor, and 
fuzzy logic [5].  
In this project we used the K-nearest neighbor 
method illustrated in Figure 6 since it can work with linear and 
non-linear data, requires only 1 parameter to be modulated (k), 
efficient when the training data is huge, doesn’t require a 
training 
phase 
and 
doesn’t 
demand 
a 
complicated 
implementation. Since it doesn’t require a training phase and 
uses the training set at the testing phase instantly, it is 
considered one of the lazy learners or the instance-based 
learners’ methods.  
The K-NN technique depends on a distance metric 
where this distance is measured between the query points 
having unlabeled class and the saved training set, the k-closest 
samples which have the smallest distances are chosen. The 
most used distance is the Euclidean Distance represented by 
the below equation: 
 
    
                              (1) 
 
       In our case, the K was chosen to be 1, so that the only 
closest sample can be chosen to match the input signal. To 
make our results more accurate, the distance was tuned as well 
in a way that allows the rejection of the sample if the distance 
calculated was found to be bigger than the indicated distance; 
thus making our system function as a verification method 
rather than an identification method. 
 
 
Fig. 6: Illustration of the K-NN algorithm 
 
ISBN: 978-1-5386-2742-6/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
14
IV. RESULTS 
       The subjects belonging to young people were divided into 
2 groups, group (a) that consisted of 23 subjects where the 
shape of the PPG was normal consisting of 2 peaks and a 
notch as shown in Figure 7, and group (b) that consisted of 18 
subjects where the shape of the PPG either have a smooth 
diastolic peak or didn’t have one at all as illustrated in Figure 
8, similar to the subjects of the elderly group shown in Figure 
9 where the PPG waveform was changed due to aging. 
 
Fig. 7: The PPG signal of a sample belonging to group (a) 
 
 
Fig. 8: The PPG signal of a sample belonging to group (b) 
 
 
Fig. 9: The PPG signal of a sample belonging to the elderly group 
A. Feature Extraction Results 
       The 40 features were applied to the 57 subjects found in 
the dataset mentioned above. The results were as follows:  
• 
Group (a): the program functioned perfectly on all 
the subjects and the 40 feature were extracted 
correctly; the process took an average of 10s on 
Matlab. 
• 
Group (b): the function wasn’t able to extract the 
features due to the lack of the diastolic peak which is 
an important factor in the PPG waveform. 
• 
Elderly group (70+): the results for this group were 
expected since with the advance of age the PPG 
signal changes its waveform and becomes smoother 
lacking a diastolic peak as well. So, there was no 
capability of extracting the features. 
B. Classification Results 
        After applying the K-NN classifier on the 23 subjects 
belonging to group (a) where the features were extracted 
successfully, the distance was chosen empirically to be 10000 
and all subjects belonging to the mentioned group were 
classified correctly, noting that the smaller the distance is 
chosen to be the more accurate the system will be. 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Conclusion 
Feature extraction and classification were tested on a 
dataset containing different types of PPG signals. The results 
showed that the used feature extraction method was capable of 
extracting 40 features from the PPG signal and its derivatives 
in a condition that the PPG signal has its normal waveform 
consisting of a systolic peak, dicrotic notch and a diastolic 
peak. Moreover, we were able to apply the K-NN classification 
method in a verification manner after defining the constant k 
and the distance metric and the results were precise as well. 
However, the accuracy of using the PPG signal for biometric 
identification cannot be determined at this point since the 
signals were not being taken instantaneously but were already 
saved and processed using the previously mentioned dataset.  
B. Future Work 
This methodology is going to be implemented using Spo2 
sensor and a raspberry pi and used as an application to unlock 
PCs instead of using a password. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  A. K. Jain, A. Ross, and S. Prabhakar "An introduction to biometric 
recognition," IEEE transactions on circuits and systems for video 
technology, vol. 14, pp. 4-20, January 2014. 
[2] S. Gaur, V.A.Shah, and M. Thakker, "Biometric recognition techniques: 
a review," International journal of advanced research in electrical, 
electronics and instrumentation engineering, vol. 1, pp.1-9, October 
2012. 
[3] P. H. Charlton, T. Bonnici, L. Tarassenko, J. Alastruey, D. A. Clifton, R. 
Beale, and P. J Watkinson, "Extraction of respiratory signals from the 
electrocardiogram and photoplethysmogram: technical and physiological 
determinants," Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine, pp. 
669–690, March 2017. 
[4] K. Polat, M.Recep Bozkurt A. Reşit Kavsaoğlu, "A novel feature 
ranking algorithm for biometric recognition with PPG signals," 
Computers in Biology and Medicine, pp. 1-14, March 2014. 
[5] J. Han, M. Kamber, J. Pei, Data Mining Concepts and Techniques, 3rd 
ed.: Morgan Kaufmann, 2012. 
 
ISBN: 978-1-5386-2742-6/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
15
