 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
In the recent decade, proliferation of mobile devices has 
driven demand for high-strength security of personal and 
private information. While long alphanumeric passwords are 
the ideal method for user logon, the time required to input 
the characters greatly decreases the convenience of having 
such security. This is especially the case in mobile systems 
where an individual may switch the device on and off in a 
short period of time. Pattern-based unlocking on a grid is a 
more convenient alternative; however a third party looking 
over the shoulder would have no problem observing and 
memorizing the pattern. Ideally, an authentication system 
should both maximize the security while minimizing 
inconvenience. These two requirements lead us to the world 
of biometrics. 
Biometric authentication takes advantage of the unique 
information that can be measured from our body. Because 
this data is both unique to an individual and convenient to 
measure, security researchers have been looking for ways to 
integrate biometrics as a mainstream form of secure 
authentication. 
Fingerprints are the prevailing form of biometrics. 
Unfortunately, due to the ease of lifting and copying a 
fingerprint, all high-security fingerprint biometric systems 
require supervised authentication. That is, a third party needs 
to observe the authentication to ensure a false finger is not 
used. In cases where stored information is less valuable, 
individuals may find unsupervised fingerprint authentication 
acceptable. 
With information requiring even higher security, we must 
investigate 
alternative 
forms 
of 
biometrics. 
Electrocardiogram (ECG) signals generated from the heart 
are showing signs of becoming a valid form of biometric 
authentication [1]. There are two main limitations with ECG 
biometrics. 
Firstly, 
additional 
electronics 
must 
be 
implemented into the device. This would require significant 
modification of the internal hardware as well as the addition 
of electrodes to the external chassis. Total implementation 
will make a great impact on device design and cost. 
Secondly, an ECG signal requires two hands to measure. If 
food is in the right hand and the device is held in the left, 
then ECG authentication cannot occur without awkward 
hand placement. 
An alternative biosignal which only requires one hand 
would be the photoplethysmogram (PPG). A PPG sensor 
measures the absorption of light through a finger as the heart 
pulses. Current studies show that PPG signals are unique 
among individuals; however the results are limited with 
small samples sizes, poor performance, and/or little 
investigation into PPG variability [2,3]. With such little 
research available on PPG-based biometrics, we would like 
to further determine its potential as a valid, accurate, and 
secure biosignal for authentication. In addition, PPG sensors 
are already included in many devices and used as a heart rate 
monitor. Thus, no additional hardware modifications are 
necessary. 
 
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
 
The PPG system used for this research is the Texas 
Instruments AFE4490/4400 integrated analog front end for 
pulse oximeters. The system is small and similar to hardware 
that is implemented in mobile devices. A Nonin clip is 
attached to the device and then connected to a human finger 
for measurement. Raw data is recorded and exported as a 
text file. 
For processing, MATLAB is used to import the PPG 
signal. To remove baseline drift and power line noise, a 6th 
order Butterworth band-pass filter spanning 1-10Hz is 
applied. The result is a smooth waveform which can then be 
broken down pulse-by-pulse and combined to create a 
representative template for the individual’s signal. 
Photoplethysmography as a Form of Biometric 
Authentication 
 
Anthony Lee and Younghyun Kim 
Samsung Electronics, Digital Media & Communications R&D Center, 
Advanced Device Team, Healthcare & Sensing Lab 
Maetan-dong 129, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon-si, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea 
Email: ant.lee@samsung.com 
 
This paper explores the feasibility of using signals acquired from a photoplethysmogram (PPG) sensor, typically used 
in mobile devices for heart rate monitoring, as a valid input signal for biometric authentication systems. Signals were 
acquired from 10 individuals, generating 708 independent datasets using the Texas Instruments AFE4490/4400 
integrated analog front end for pulse oximeters. Results indicate successful identification of individuals with a false 
acceptance rate of 4.2% and a false rejection rate of 3.7%. Because PPG signal morphology is dependent on the 
physical state of an individual, biometric authentication cannot occur under stress or coercion which introduces a 
deviation in heart rate. This technique has demonstrated to be a feasible and simpler replacement to upcoming 
biometric advancements such as electrocardiogram-based authentication systems, but dependence on consistent 
measuring conditions limits the capabilities in mobile systems. 
 
978-1-4799-8203-5/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
 
 
The template is then used to extract physical features from 
the waveform as shown in Figure 1. Twenty-two features in 
total are computed, consisting of waveform angle, area, and 
inflection point data. The data is then stored as the registered 
user. This process is repeated for a secondary authorization 
attempt, and the newly computed features are compared to 
the stored features for determination of pass or fail. 
 
Fig. 1. Feature extraction from PPG waveform 
 
Comparison of features can be performed using methods 
similar to ECG-based biometrics. Common techniques 
include nearest neighbor classifiers, neural networks, and 
support vector machines [4]. A feed-forward neural network 
was chosen due to the ease of programming and learning 
involved with small feature sets. 
The experiment consisted of 708 independent data 
combinations from PPG data taken from 10 subjects. For 
neural network training, 531 of these data combinations 
were reserved, leaving 177 available for performance testing. 
After performance testing, PPG data was also tested for 
variability during different physical conditions. 
 
III. RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS 
 
Depending on the samples being compared, the biometric 
software will indicate “Accept” when it believes the user 
matches the stored profile. Otherwise, it will output “Reject.” 
Results are shown in the confusion matrix of Figure 2. The 
data illustrates convergence of the neural network to a 
generalized set of data with false acceptance rate of 4.2%, 
false rejection rate of 3.7%, positive predictivity of 95.1%, 
and negative predictivity of 96.8%.  
Based on these results, we can conclude that PPG 
biosignals contain uniquely identifiable information and 
have successfully differentiated among 170 independent 
measurements from ten individuals with only 7 false 
classifications. The next step is to investigate stability of the 
PPG biosignal itself. 
Because the PPG waveform is determined by the flow of 
blood, 
physical 
conditions 
may 
impact 
the 
signal 
morphology. If significant changes are evident, then all 
variables must be held constant for PPG-based biometrics to 
be consistent. Figure 3 illustrates the impact of exercise on 
the shape of the PPG waveform. A significant increase in the 
amplitude of both the first peak and the dichrotic notch are 
evident after a moderate elevation in heart rate. In addition, 
arm position and skin temperature have shown to impact 
results. 
 
 
Expected Class 
Reject 
Accept
Output Class 
Reject 
92 
3 
Accept 
4 
78 
Fig. 2. Neural network performance for PPG identification 
 
 
Fig. 3. Impact of exercise on PPG signal morphology 
 
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
 
In this study, biometric identification was successfully 
performed using a standard photoplethysmogram found in 
typical heart rate monitoring devices. Error rates of less than 
5% indicate significance and potential viability as a 
biometric candidate. Future work involves expanding the 
dataset with increased sample size and environmental 
conditions. PPG sensitivity to physical conditions means the 
user must maintain stable conditions with respect to heart 
rate, arm position, and skin temperature. This additional 
requirement can be used as a means to prevent forced or 
unaware authentication by a third party, as the measuring 
environmental and physiological conditions will no longer 
be maintained. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Biel, L. et al. ECG analysis: a new approach in human 
identification. 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Instrumentation 
and 
Measurement 50, 808-812 (2001). 
[2] Kavsaoglu, A. et al. A novel feature ranking algorithm for 
biometric recognition with PPG signals. Computers in Biology and 
Medicine 49, 1-14 (2014). 
[3] Bonissi, A. et al. A preliminary study on continuous 
authentication methods for photoplethysmographic biometrics. 
Proc. of the 2013 IEEE Workshop on Biometric Measurements and 
Systems for Security and Medical Applications (2013). 
[4] Odinaka, I. et al. ECG biometric recognition: a comparative 
analysis. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security 
7, 1812-1824 (2012). 
 
