Proc of the 4th Annual IEEE Conf on Information Technology Applications in Biomedicine, UK 
A Novel Biometric Approach in Human Verification by Photoplethysmographic Signals 
Y. Y. Gu, Y. Zhang, andY. T. Zhang 
Joint Research Center for Biomedical Engineering 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, China 
Email: ytzhang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk 
Abstract-This paper presents a new human verification 
approach using photoplethysmography (PPG) signals that can 
be obtained easily from the fmgertip. The experiment was 
performed on a group of 17 healthy subjects, and evident 
characteristics of the PPG signals were studied. These 
characteristics are unique identifiers specific to different 
persons while they are similar enough to recognize the same 
person. Four feature parameters were extracted from 
digitalized PPG signals The template feature vector was 
formulated using part of the recorded signa4 and then the 
discriminant function was applied to the remaining data for 
verification. The result with a successful rate of 94% shows 
that this method is promising for human verification. 
Keywordr- 
Biometrics, 
Photoplethysmography 
(PPG), 
Verification, Euclidean distance 
I . INTRODUCTION 
Automatic human identification using biometrics is 
gaining more importance. Its potential application can be 
great in many different areas such as telemedicine or e- 
banking. Nowadays, most systems that control access to 
financial transactions, computer networks, or secured 
locations still identify authorized persons by recognizing 
passwords, or ID cards. These systems are not reliable 
enough, because the information is easy to be stolen or 
forged. Being able to eliminate such common problems, 
biometric systems, which use unique human physical or 
behavioral characteristics to automatically identlfy a person, 
can ensure much greater security or confidentiality. 
Certain characteristics of our bodies or features of our 
behaviors have been studied as means of human 
identlfication, such as fingerprint, face [l] [2], voice [3], 
retindirk 
[4], lip movement [5], gait motion [6], 
electroencephalograph (EEG) [7], and electrocardiograph 
(ECG) [8] [9]. New applications based on these biometric 
approaches would provide us with a promising and 
irrefutable future of human identification. However, 
fingerprint can be recreated in latex, face recognition can be 
fooled by a photo, voice can be imitated [lo], and the 
methods based on EEG or ECG are to some extent 
cumbersome because several electrodes are required to pick 
up the bio-signals. 
In this paper, we propose to use photoplethysmographic 
(PPG) signals for human verification. Compared with other 
biometric approaches, PPG technique has several distinct 
advantages including low development cost, easy to use 
without any complicated procedure or special skill, and 
conveniently accessible to various sites of human body, such 
as finger, ear lobe, wrist or arm. The specific aim of this 
work is to investigate the feasibility of the new approach. 
The preliminary results of the experiments performed on the 
fingertip of the subjects demonstrate that the PPG approach 
is promising for human verification. 
11. METHODOLOGY 
PPG data recording was done on 17 healthy subjects. 
During the experiment, all the subjects sat still on a chair 
and let their muscle relax. The PPG probe (reflective), 
consisting of a LED and a photodetector, was attached on 
the fingertip (right index finger) by a belt. PPG signals were 
recorded continuously for about one minute fi-om each 
person, and converted into digital signals at the samphg 
rate of 1K samplesk 
The raw data was preprocessed using a smoothing 
technique before feature extraction. A typical PPG signal is 
shown in Fig. 1. Four feature parameters -- peak number, 
time interval, upward slope and downward slope -- were 
extracted fi-om the PPG signals of each subject (see Fig. 1). 
The template vector consisting of four averaged feature 
parameters was formulated for each subject. The four 
features are defined as follows: 
Peak 
tl 
Fig. 1: A typical PPG signal with 2 peaks on each pulse 
of heart contraction circle. 
The peak number M : the number of peaks on 
each pulse; 
The upward slope k, : the slope between the 
bottom of each waveform and the first peak; 
The downward slope k, : the slope between the 
last peak of each waveform and the bottom; 
The time interval t, : the time interval between the 
bottom point and the first peak point; 
13 
In order to determine the discriminability of the four 
features and the weight p j  of each parameter, a statistical 
analysis was performed. A ratio Fj between the interclass 
and intraclass variabilities as defined in Eq. (1) was 
calculated. The higher the ratio, the more discriminant the 
feature is. 
Interclass Variability 
Intraclass Variability 
Fj = 
where F, is the ratio for the jth feature, 
is the mean of 
the jth feature of the ith subject, < is the mean of jth 
feature, ybj is the jth feature of the ~ r h  
pulse of the ith 
subject, N is the number of subjects, and K, is the number 
of pulses used for feature extraction fiom the ith subject. 
The verification was carried out by comparing the 
sample vector obtained at dlfferent periods of time with the 
template feature vector. The final decision was made based 
on the Euclidean distance d , combined with the weight p j  
of each feature parameter, 
-t,)’ 
I 
J=l 
where L being the dimension of the feature vector, p ,  the 
weight coefficient which is determined by the percentage of 
F,distributed to the jth feature,xIthe jth component of 
the sample feature vector, and t, the jth component of the 
template feature vector. 
The Euclidean distance d between each sample vector 
and each template vector was calculated. The decision of the 
verification was done on the subject with the minimum 
value of d .  
111. RESULTS 
Only one out of the 17 subjects could not be verified 
correctly, whch yielded a successful rate of 94%. The only 
one error was attributed to the poor quality of the signals 
from the subject, perhaps due to respiration and motion 
artifacts, which resulted in a large standard deviation (SD) 
of the template feature vector and a large value of modified 
Euclidean distance d . 
IV. DISCUSSION 
A new idea of using PPG signals for human verlfication 
is proposed in this paper. The verification is accomplished 
by simply putting the fingertip on the PPG sensors. The 
result of our study shows that the PPG signals have 
predominant characteristics that can be used to identify 
different persons. According to our experimental results, the 
rate of correct verification can reach up to 94% (one out of 
seventeen in error). 
However, it should be pointed out that PPG signals vary 
substantially under different conditions, especially under 
different pressures. Further research based on large database 
must be done in the future to improve this new method 
before it can be finally put into use in practice. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This work is supported by Hong Kong Innovation and 
Technology Fund (ITS4 14/01) and co-sponsored by 
Standard Telecommunications Ltd. and IDT Technology Ltd. 
REFERENCES 
[l] Bnmelli, R and Poggio, T., “Face recognition: Features versus 
templates”, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 
Intelligence, Volume: 15, Issue: 10, pp. 1042-1052, 1993. 
[2] A Samal and P. A. Iyengar, “Automatic recognition and analysis of 
human faces and facial expressions: A survey,” IEEE Transactions Pattern 
Recognition, vol. 25, pp. 65-67, 1992. 
[3] D. Dmn, ‘TJsing a multi-layer peceptron neural for human voice 
identification”, Proceedings of the 4th Int. Cod. Signal Process. Applicat. 
Technol., Newton, MA, USA, 1993. 
[4] Negin, M, Chmielewski, T.A., Jr., Salganicoff, M., van Seelen, U.M, 
Venetainer, P.L. and Zhang, G.G., “An iris biometric system for public and 
personal use”, Computer, Volume: 33, Issue: 2, pp. 70-75,2000. 
[5] Kyong Seok Paik, Chin Hyan Chung, Jin Ok Kim and Dae Jun Hwang, 
“On a lip print recognition by the pattern kernels with multiresolution 
arohitecture”, Proceedings of International Conference on Image Processing, 
Volume: 2, pp. 246-249,2001. 
[6] ChewYean Yam, Nixon, M.S. 
and Carter, J.N., “Performance analysis 
on new biomshic gait motion model”, Rocesdings of the 5th IEEE 
Southwest Symposium on Image Analysis and Interpretation, pp. 31-34, 
2002 
[A Paranjape, RB., Mahovsky, J., Benedicenti, L. and Kales’, Z., ‘The 
elechoencephalogram as a biometric,” Canadian Conference on Electxical 
and Computer Engineering, Volume: 2, pp. 1363-1366,2001. 
[8] Biel, L., Pettersson, O., Philipson, L. and Wide, P., “ECG analysis: a 
new approach in 
human identification”, IEEE Transactions on 
Instrumentation and Measurement, Volume: 50 Issue: 3, pp. 808-812,2001, 
[9] Biel, L., Pettersson, O., Philipson, L. and Wide, P., “ECG analysis: a 
new approach in human identification,” IMTC/99, Proceedings of the 16th 
IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference, Volume: 
1, pp. 557-561, 1999. 
[lo] T. W. Shen, W. J. Tompkins and Y. H. Hu, “One-Lead ECG for 
Ident$ 
Vdioation,” 2& Joint Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society and the Biomedical Engineering Society, 
Huston, 2002 
[ll] Ruud.M Bolle, Sharath Pankanti and Nalini K. Ratha, “Evaluation 
Techniques 
for 
Biometric-based 
Authentication 
System (FRR)”, 
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, 
Volume: 2, pp. 831-837,2000, 
14 
