Photoplethysmographic Authentication through Fuzzy Logic 
Y. Y. Gu and Y. T. Zhay 
Joint Research Center for Biomedical Engineenng 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong. Shatin. N.T.. Hong Kong. China 
Email: )Tzhang@ee.cuhk.edu.hk 
Absrracr-This paper presents a fuzzy logic approach to 
investigate the feasibility of using photoplethysmographic 
(PPG) signals as a new method for human verification. PPG 
signals were obtained from the fingertip nith a group of 
seventeen healthy subjects, and four distinctive features 
extracted were used as the fuzzy inputs for classification. The 
successful rate of the fuzzy-based decision-making can reach 
up to 94% within the same trial, and 82.3% with two 
different trials. The result indicates that the new biometrics 
based on PPG signals is potentially applicable for human 
verification. This study is an addendum to our work carried 
out earlier. [I] 
Kewords . Photoplethysmography, fuzzy logic, biometrics. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Automatic human authentication using biometrics is 
an emerging important technology to secure human 
interactions with safety systems. Biometric approaches 
today have been made possible by the explosive advances 
in computing power, and have been made necessary by 
the widespread connection of computers all over the world. 
Traditional ways of authentication. primarily passwords 
and identification cards, though still remain essential. their 
inevitable drawbacks with low degrees of security result 
in unreliable verifications. Instead, biometric applications, 
which 
use unique human 
physical 
or behavioral 
characteristics to automatically identify a person. are able 
to ensure much higher security. 
Much work has been done on some biometric 
technologies, such as fingerprint identification, face 
recognition [Z], retindins scan 131, and etc. Other human 
features used in this area include voice, lip [4]. EEG [5] 
and ECG [6]. However, fingerprint can be recreated in 
latex; two faces can be alike, for example twins; voice can 
be imitated. and the methods based on EEG or ECG are to 
some extent cumbersome because several elecudes are 
required to pick up the biesipals. 
The photoplethysmographic (PPG) technique utilizes 
an optical sensor that produces a signal associated with 
change in the volume of red blood cells in the peripheral 
micro-vascular bed with each pressure pulse initiated by 
the heart [7]. Compared with other biometric approaches, 
PPG technique has several distinct advantages including 
low development 
cost, easy to use without 
any 
complicated procedure or special skill, and conveniently 
accessible to various sites of human body, such as finger, 
ear lobe, wrist or arm The specific aim of this work is to 
study the feasibility of this new PPG approach through 
fuzzy logic. 
11. METHODOLOGY 
Experiments were conducted on seventeen healthy 
subjects aged 23-30. A reflective PPG probe. consisting of 
a LED and a photodetector, was attached on the fingertip 
(right index finger) by a belt. PPG siyals were recorded 
continuously for about one minute from each person. and 
converted into digital signals at the sanipling rate of IK 
samplesls. 
The raw data were preprocessed by filtering the low 
frequency and high frequency components. A t)vical PPG 
signal is shown in Fig. I. Four feature parameters -- peak 
number, time interval, upward slope and downward slope 
- were extracted from the PPG signals of each subject (see 
Fig. 1). The enrollment template vector consisting of four 
averaged feature parameters was formulated for each 
subject. The four features are defined as follows: 
Peak 
t, 
Fig. I: -1 typic31 PPG Siena! with 2 peaks on each 
pulse of hean mnlrsclion circle. 
1) The peak number M: the number of peaks on each 
pulse: 
2) The upward slope k, : the slope between the bottom of 
each waveform and the fust peak; 
3) The downward slope kz : the slope between the last 
peak of each waveform and the bottom; 
4) The time interval rl : the time interval between the 
bottom point and the first peak point; 
Fuzzy logic was implemented for decision-making. in 
which an output score was generated as the result of the 
comparison between the enrollment template and the 
newly generated one. 
The Gaussian Function was 
selected as the membership function (MF), which can be 
expressed as follows: 
where p 
is the averaged value of the ,ih 
feature 
paramete: of the irh subject. and U,, is the standard 
deviation of jrlz feature parameter of the i r h  subject. 
The degree of membership for each feature parameter 
was determined by the maximum value of the overlapped 
area created by the Gaussian curves of the two templates. 
Fig. 2 shows an example to illusuate how the approach 
works: 
0-7803-7944-6/03/$17.0002003 IEEE 
136 
The enrollment template parameter ist, = 1.852?0.076: 
while the newly generated template parameter is given 
bys, =1.784?0.057. 
Inserting the two sets of parameters into 
( I )  
respectively generates two curves as shown in Fig. 2. The 
shadowed area is overlapped by the two curves and the 
maximum value is recorded as the membership degree. 
The values inclining towards 1 on the vertical axis 
indicate a good match. while those inclining towards 0 
represent a poor match. 
'ir_ 
" 
~ 
7: j ,, : '. 
I 
-i -------------- -0 
crp(-1/2'(r-1.8b21~/".l~,b~~ 
, .$ j 
$5 
L
L
 
%. ! 
Fip. 2 The Gaussian cun'cs eeneraird by she IU'O lernplates 
In this way, each newly generated feature parameter 
will produce a value compared with the enrollment 
template parameter. This leaves four membership values 
for a single subject. which must be consolidated using an 
AND operator to obtain a final output score that lies 
between 0 and 1. Normally; the fuzzy logic AND operator 
takes the minimum value of all the membership values [8]. 
However. in practice it shows that the mean value often 
does not reflect the true degree to which two templates 
match [9]. So finally, a type of MEAN operator was 
utilized, which takes the weighted average of the four 
membership values. 
The verification was carried out under two situations: 
I )  the two templates were generated in the same trial but 
at different periods of time; and 2) the two templates were 
generated in two different trials. between two of which 
there was a few minutes' rest. 
111. RESULTS 
A"DlSCUSSl0N 
Only one out of the seventeen subjects could not be 
verified correctly, if the two templates were within the 
same trial. For those generated from different trials, the 
successful rate can so far reach up to 82.3% (three out of 
seventeen could not be verified). These false rejections 
were mainly attributed to the poor quality of the signals 
from the subjects, perhaps due to respiration and motion 
artifacts, which resulted in some variations in the template 
feature vector and a large standard deviation (SD), and 
hence a small degree of membership. 
In this work, the PPG authentication as a new 
approach for human verification is investigated through 
fuzzy logic. The preliminary experimental results show 
that the PPG signals have predominant characteristics that 
can be used to identify different persons. With the fuzzy- 
based decision-making method, the rate of correct 
verification can reach up to 94% (one out of seventeen in 
error) within the same trial. and 82.3% wii:h two different 
trials (three out of seventeen in errors). 
The result for two different o-ials is not yet satisfactory, 
perhaps mainly due to the variations in the contacting 
force applied on the PPG sensor during different trials. 
Further research based on transmission PPG sensor is 
necessary; because the finger clip can possibly avoid such. 
intra-subject variations. It is ;also desir:ible to further 
explore a better fuzzy implementation method such as 
new membership functions. to improve the performance 
of PPG-based authentication. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by H:ong Kong Innovation and 
Technology Fund (ITS11 14/01) and co-sponsored by 
Standard Telecommunications Ird. and IDT Technology 
Lid. 
REFERENCES: 
[ I ]  Gu, Y.Y., Bang_ Y., Zliang, Y .  T._ ''A Novel 
Biometric 
Approach 
in 
Human 
Verification 
by 
Information Technology Applications iii Biomedicine, 
2003. 
[2] Brunelli. R. and Poggio. T., "Face recognition: 
Features versus templates". IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis 
and Machine Intelligence. Volume: 15. Issue: IO. pp. 
1042-1052.1993. 
[3] Negin, M., Chmielewski. T.A.. Jr., Salganicoff. M., 
von Seelen. U.M.. Venetainer. P.L. and Ztiang. G.G.. "An 
iris biometric system for public and personal use", 
Computer, Volume: 33. Issue: 2, pp. 70-75,2000. 
[4] Kyong Seok Paik. Chin Hyan Chung, Jin Ok Kim and 
Dae Jun Hwang, "On a lip print recognition by the pattern 
kernels with multiresolution architecture"; Proc. Con< on 
Image Processing, Volume: 2. p p  246-249, 2001. 
[5] Paranjape, R.B., Mahovsky, J., Benedicenti, L. and 
Koles', Z., "The electroencephalogram as a biometric: 
Canadian 
Conference on 
Electrical 
;md Computer 
Engineering, Volume: 2, pp. 1363-1366, 2001. 
[6] Biel, L., Penersson, 0.; 
Philipson, L. and Wide, P.; 
"ECG analysis: a new approach in human identification". 
IEEE Traiis. on Instrumentation and Measurement. 
Volume: 50Issue: 3, pp. 808-812, 2001. 
[7] Allen, 1. and Murray, A., "Comparison of Regional 
Variability in Multi-site Phot~plethysmographic Pulse 
Wave Characteristics '.) Proc. I" Conf. Medical Signal and 
Information I pp. 26-3 1,2000. 
[SI D. McNeil 
and 
P. 
Freiberger, FitLT Logic, 
Touchstone. Simon & Schuster. Old Tappan. N.1.. 1991. 
[9] De Ru, W.G. and Eloff. J.H.P., "Enhanced password 
authentication 
through fuzzy losic", 
IEEE Expert, 
Volume: 12. pp. 38-45. 1997. 
Photoplethysmographic 
Signals," 
Pro,?. 
4"' 
Conf 
137 
