International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016), pp. 9-20 
http://dx.doi.org/10.14257/ijbsbt.2016.8.3.02 
 
 
ISSN: 2233-7849 IJBSBT 
Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
Development of an Acceleration Plethysmogram based Cardioid 
Graph Biometric Identification 
 
 
Khairul Azami Sidek, Munieroh Osman, Siti Nurfarah Ain Mohd Azam and Nur 
Izzati Zainal 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,  
International Islamic University Malaysia 
P. O. Box 10, Jalan Gombak, 50728 Kuala Lumpur 
E-mail: azami@iium.edu.my 
Abstract 
The increasing identity theft cases are alarming which puts biometric as the 
alternative solution to combat identity crime. Recently, biosignals are proposed as 
biometric modalities. Thus, in this study, the development of an Acceleration 
Plethysmogram (APG) based Cardioid graph biometric identification is presented. A 
total of 10 Photoplethysmogram (PPG) data from MIMIC II Waveform Database 
(MIMIC2WDB) with sampling frequency of 125 Hz were obtained. The datasets are later 
converted to APG signal by the second order differentiation and preprocessed with 
Butterworth filter. Then, Cardioid based graph of APG signal was generated. Its centroid 
and Euclidean distance are calculated. Finally, classification is done by applying these 
extracted features to Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and Naïve Bayes neural networks 
classifiers. Our experimentation results show that subject recognition is possible by 
obtaining classification accuracy of 95% for APG based Cardioid graph for both 
classifiers while only 85% and 70% for PPG signal in MLP and Naïve Bayes classifiers. 
These outcomes indicate that APG based Cardioid graph biometric identification is a 
feasible solution to overcome identity fraud. 
 
Keywords: Plethysmogram, APG, Photoplethysmogram, PPG, biometric, Cardioid. 
 
1. Introduction 
Recently, identity theft or identity fraud has become one of the most popular crimes. 
According to the Identity Crime and Misuse in Australia Survey conducted by the 
Australian Institute of Criminology for the Attorney-General in May 2013, a total of 1 in 
10 Australians have reported misuse of their personal information in the previous 12 
months, with 1 in 5 people reporting misuse of their personal information at some time 
during their life [1]. The vulnerability in securing private information or identification 
provides enough information for fraudsters and criminals. 
Moreover, a report from the CyberSecurity Malaysia showed that identity theft has 
increased yearly. In 2012, a total of 40% of the cybercrime related cases are from identity 
fraud [2]. Thus, identity theft is a serious crime which can lead a person to be at fault for 
something that he did not commit. Therefore, one of the strategies to combat identity 
crime is by using biometric recognition. 
It is a general term used to describe a characteristic or a process. It automates 
recognition of an individual based on measurable biological (anatomical and 
physiological) and behavioural characteristics to identify an individual. Any measurable 
physiological and behavioral characteristic can be a biometric modality [3]. Examples of 
biometric modalities include fingerprint, face, iris and electrocardiogram (ECG). 
In the past years, biosignals have been a viable identification mechanism. These 
signals have the capability to recognize individual via different techniques and 
International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016) 
 
 
10  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
approaches such as the photoplethysmogram (PPG) signal. Recently, analyzing the PPG 
waveform has attracted interest from researcher. PPG have been widely used for 
biometric and medical benefits. However, based on previous literatures, PPG signal 
contains systolic and diastolic peaks which are hard to identify. Another biosignal called 
the acceleration plethysmogram (APG) is believed to provide more accurate recognition 
of the inflection points and an easier interpretation of the signal. APG is derived from the 
second derivative of PPG and acts as an indicator of the acceleration of the blood in the 
finger [4]. It contains lots of discriminative information which can be used for person 
identification. Figure 1 depicts the PPG and APG waveforms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: The upper signal is a PPG waveform consisting of one systolic and diastolic 
wave. The lower signal is the second derivative of a PPG. Also known as APG consisting 
of a, b, c, d and e waves [5]. 
Cardioid based graph, a feature extraction technique which have sound results in ECG 
analysis for subject recognition has the potential to be applied in the APG domain. The 
capability of applying APG based Cardioid graph in biometric identification has the 
potential to become a substitute or complementary entity for currently available system. 
Thus in this study, we will propose of applying characteristic of APG signals for 
biometric identification based on Cardioid graph. Based on our knowledge, little has been 
said pertaining to the aforementioned topic. Thus, we will propose a novel biometric 
identification technique in order to discriminate individuals. 
 
2. Related Works 
Recently, many researches on APG have been performed since this biosignal provide a 
stable baseline and can be used to separate components of the waveform clearer. 
Moreover, APG is believed to provide a lot of useful information [4]. Thus, in this 
section, we will briefly discuss on some related literature to APG signal which is divided 
into literatures on APG and Cardioid based graph. 
Earlier, Elgendi et al in [6] have investigated if variations in APG signals can be used 
to measure heart rate variability (HRV) instead of the conventional method ECG signals. 
HRV will be calculated from APG since the peak in APG is easier to be obtained and 
defined resulting in more accuracy of heart rate. A numbers of PPG data is taken from 26 
healthy male subjects with mean ±SD age of 27±6.9. The PPG data is measured while the 
subject is at rest and at sampling rate of 20 seconds. The result of this study shows that 
HRV indices can be calculated using APG signal as there is a strong correlation between 
the two HRV indices. 
Elgendi et al in [7] have come out with an algorithm to detect systolic peaks under 
challenging conditions. The systolic-peak detection is known to be an important step in 
analyzing heart rate variability. A total of 30 males and 10 females of healthy respondent 
with ±SD age of 34.7±6.6 have participated. A PPG-equipped device is used for data 
International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016) 
 
 
Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          11 
collection. Each respondent undergoes 30 minutes of triaging and resuscitating followed 
by 30 minutes of cooling and rest. From this study, the results showed that the proposed 
algorithm is robust and efficient in detecting systolic peak in PPG signal collected in 
challenging conditions with 99.89% of overall sensitivity and 99.84% of positive 
predictivity. 
Later, Elgendi [8] introduced a rapid and robust algorithm to detect c, d and e waves in 
APG signals, specifically in a heat-stressed context. A total of 27 PPG signal was 
collected from a healthy male subjects with a mean ± SD age of 27 ± 6.9. The data was 
measured while the subject was at rest and after exercise in duration of 20 seconds for 
each data segment. The sampling rate while collecting data used is 200Hz. The proposed 
algorithms found to give a result of 99.95% sensitivity and 98.35% positive predictivity. 
Next, we briefly discuss some related literature on Cardioid based graph. This method 
has been used by researchers as features extraction techniques in identification and 
medical system. Cardioid has been applied widely in identification individuals by using 
ECG signals. 
In another paper, Sidek et al in [9] have proposed data mining technique on Cardioid 
graph based ECG biometric authentication. The ECG features are extracted by using set 
of Euclidean distances with the aid of data mining technique. A number of 26 ECG 
recordings were taken from two different public databases which comprised of 18 
subjects from NSRDB and 8 subjects from MITDB. The consequence of this research 
shows that the classification accuracy by applying data mining technique for NSRDB is 
98.60% and 98.30% for MITDB. A more efficient and rigorous method of identifying 
individuals for a home healthcare system is attained with the aid of Bayes Network 
classifier. 
In another research, Sufi et al in [10] have performed a novel concept of Cardioid in 
minimizing the cardiovascular disease diagnosis and treatment time. Focusing on the 
increasing rate of cardiovascular related deaths, the study tried to overcome this situation 
by providing both faster authentication and diagnosis. A total of 30 randomly selected 
ECG entries from MIT BIH Database are extensively used for benchmarking algorithms 
pertaining to ECG diagnosis, compression and others. Two Cardioid based authentication 
mechanism known as Method 1 and Method 2 have been designed in this paper for 
authentication mechanism. From the experiment, Method 1 was found to be more 
accuracy with possible misclassification rate but has a higher computational expense. On 
the other hand, Method 2 is simpler as compared to Method 1. The proposed Method 2 
requires less storage and executes faster for individual identification. The results shows 
that, the authentication time can be reduced from 30.64s to 0.4398s and the diagnosis 
time have been improved from several minutes to less than 0.5s. 
However, based on these previous researches, biometric recognition using Cardioid 
graph on APG has never been used for individual identification. Thus, in this study, we 
propose of applying APG based Cardiod graph biometric identification. 
 
3. Methodology 
Recently, biometric has appeared as one of the most stable and decisive mechanism for 
individual identification. APG signals can be obtained by double differentiating the PPG 
signal. PPG signal is a non-invasive and accurate procedure to obtain physiological 
information. Cardioid based graph is used as extracted features. Thus, we are proposing 
this biological identification approaches with Cardioid based graph as a new biometric 
measures. 
Therefore, in this section, the procedures involved in this identification system are 
explained and the summary of this process is illustrated in Figure 2. 
 
 
International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016) 
 
 
12  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The Proposed Identification System 
3.1. Data Collection 
PPG datasets used in this study were taken from PhysioNet, a free access via the web 
to physiological signal archive [11]. PPG recordings duration for each subject were over 
ten second with sampling rate of 125 Hz. These samples were fetched from the databases 
of MIMIC II Waveform Version 3 Part 2 and 3 respectively. 
 
3.2. Signal Differentiation 
In order to obtain the APG signals Z[n], the PPG signals S[n] needs to be 
differentiated twice. 
  , -  | , -   ,   -|  
 
 
(1.1) 
                                , -  |  , -    ,   -           
                  (1.2) 
The second derivatives of PPG or also known as APG produces peaks of a, b, c, d, and 
e wave which is more clearly defined compared to PPG. Thus, the interpretation process 
can be done easier and faster. Figure 3 shows a PPG signal converted to an APG signal. 
 
 
Figure 3. PPG Signal Converted to APG Signal 
3.3. Pre-processing 
In this part, Butterworth filter is applied to APG signal to remove high frequency noise 
and disturbance like baseline wander. Butterworth is used as it offers good transition 
band characteristics at low coefficient orders which are practical to implement. A 
Butterworth filter with bandpass 0.01 is implemented. The order of the filter taken is at 
2nd order. Thus, a clean and more accurate APG signal is generated. 
 
3.4. APG Segmentation 
For this part, a, b, c, d, and e wave in the APG signal is defined. One complete cycle 
consist of a to e wave is identified. The a to e wave then is used to construct an overlap 
waveform of APG signals where 10 cycles of APG wave is selected. 
 
 
 
International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016) 
 
 
Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          13 
3.5. Domain Transformation 
This next step is very critical as the persistency of the classification accuracy is 
determined from Cardioid based person identification mechanism [9, 10]. The time series 
representation is lost once Cardioid is constructed as it will be replaced by points of a 
closed loop as shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. A Cardioid Graph 
The APG signal is represented by x(t) as in Equation 1.3. 
 
 ( )  * ( )  ( )  ( )    ( )+   
                (1.3) 
where x(t) are APG signals consisting of peak waves a, b, c, d and e and N is the total 
number of APG cycles for a given time. In order to get the points for the Cardioid, the a, 
b, c, d and e waves are first differentiated as in Equation 1.4. 
 ( )   ( )   (   ) 
 
 
 
(3.4) 
where          (   )     ( ) is the differentiated APG dataset.  
A closed loop graph is constructed based on a scattered XY graph called the Cardioid 
after the required vector x and y is obtained. The x-axis is the APG amplitudes of a, b, c, 
d and e waves and the y-axis is differentiated APG signal. Throughout this process, the 
time series of APG signal is changed to a two dimensional loop. 
 
3.6. Feature Extraction 
In Figure 5, centroid is the centre coordinate of the closed loop graph and the distance 
between the centroid to a given point on the Cardioid is known as extrema points. These 
two centroids and extrema points are then extracted. 
 
(     )  [
∑
 ( )
 
   
 
 
∑
 ( )
 
   
 
]  
 
         
(1.5) 
Equation 1.5 shows how to obtain the centroid where cx and cy are the coordinate 
positions of the centroid in the Cardioid graph. The centroid is set as the reference point 
to compute the Euclidean distance, ed(i) as shown in Equation 1.6. 
 
  ( )   √(    ( ))  (    ( ))   
 
(1.6) 
where ed(i)=ed1, ed2, ed3, …, ed(n).  
The features extracted from the Cardioid based graph are then adapted to MLP 
classification which will be conducted in the next section. 
 
 
 
International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016) 
 
 
14  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
3.7. Classification 
Classification is the last step in biometric identification. This process is performed by 
using two commonly used classifiers which are Multilayer Perceptron and Naïve Bayes. 
These classification algorithms are briefly described in the next sub-sections. 
 
3.7.1. Multilayer Perceptron 
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) method has been used for classification. MLP which 
consist of a few layers and a feedforward structure with an error based training 
mechanism is derived from the input layer, the hidden layers and the output layer. In this 
study, Euclidean distance of the Cardioid based graph is the input layer and the output 
layer will determine the class of subject. There is at least one neuron in each layer. In 
Figure 5, the neuron in the hidden layer is linked to both neurons in the input and output 
layers, where weight wi connects the input neuron xm with the hidden neuron hj, while 
the weight vk connects the output neuron yn with the hidden neuron hj. Input neurons 
xm, 1 ≤ m ≤ l is assigned to be equal to the corresponding data vector component. Next, 
data will propagate in a forward direction through the perceptron until the output neuron 
yn, 1 ≤ n ≤ n are reached. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. A Multilayer Perceptron Network 
 
MLP neural network is chosen as the classifier because of its adaptability, noise 
tolerance and collective computability. Those are the main features of biometric. 
Therefore, the synaptic weights are determined to minimize error. 
 
3.7. Naïve Bayes 
Naïve Bayes classifier is one of the classification method used to categorize the class 
labels for a set of features. It is based on the Bayesian theorem and classification is 
performed by making a strong assumption that all the attributes are conditionally 
independent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. The structure of Naïve Bayes Network 
International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016) 
 
 
Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          15 
Naïve Bayes classifier learns from training data, the conditional probability of each 
attribute Ai and the class label C as illustrated in Figure 6. Bayes rule is applied to 
determine the probability of the class label, C of the given instances A1, . . ., An. Then, 
classification is done by predicting the highest posterior probability. 
Since Naïve Bayes is a conditionally independent attributes, the instances to be 
classified is represented by a vector A = (A1. . . An) indicating some n features. Using 
Bayes’ theorem, the probability is given by: 
                               ( | )  
 ( | )  ( )
 ( )
 
 
                             (3.7) 
where the conditional independence assumption is as follows: 
P(A1, . . . , An | C) = P(A1|Cj) . . . P(An | Cj ) 
                  (3.8) 
The main advantage of Naïve Bayes is its simple technique and only requires small 
amount of training data to obtain a good estimate of the probability. 
 
4. Experimentation and Results 
A total of 10 datasets obtained from PhysioNet were tested in this study. Each dataset 
is taken for duration of 10 seconds with sampling rate of 125 Hz. The datasets were 
originally in the PPG waveform and different from each subject. Then, the signal is 
segmentized to 10 cycles and then differentiated twice to obtain the APG signal. We use 
second order Butterworth filter at frequency of 0.01 Hz to reduce noise and baseline 
wander of APG signal. 
Figures 7, 8 and 9 depict the conversion process of PPG signal to APG signal and 
filtered APG signal for three subjects. The filtered segmentized APG signal consists of a, 
b, c, d and e waves. These waves are used for constructing the 2D Cardioid based graph. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. PPG and APG of Subject 3700665 
 
International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016) 
 
 
16  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
 
Figure 8. PPG and APG of Subject 3101146 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. PPG and APG of Subject 3128311 
Figure 10, 11 and 12 illustrates the Cardioid based graph constructed from the APG 
signal. We observed that the Cardioid based graph for each subject is different in terms of 
the scale and the positions of the centroid. Generally, self-similarities are shown in the 
Cardioid based graph which verifies the possibility of using APG Cardioid based graph 
for individual identification.  
 
International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016) 
 
 
Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          17 
 
Figure 4.5. Cardioid of Subject 3700665 
 
Figure 4.7. Cardioid of Subject 3101146 
 
Figure 4.8. Cardioid of Subject 3128311 
International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016) 
 
 
18  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
Then, we computed the centroid and the Euclidean distance of the closed loop by using 
Equation 1.5 and 1.6. We have selected 4 loops of Cardioid based graph for each subject 
where each loops contain 47 different instances. This gives a total of 188 instances for all 
the subjects. Half of the datasets are used as training and the remaining acts as the testing 
data. 
 
Finally, MLP and Naïve Bayes neural network were applied to the instances to classify 
the subjects by supplying the training and the testing set. The results of the experiment 
are shown in Table 1. 
Table 1. Classification accuracy of APG and PPG 
Method 
Classification 
Accuracy for APG 
Classification 
Accuracy for PPG 
MLP 
95% 
45% 
Naïve Bayes 
95% 
55% 
 
Based on the result, we found out that classification accuracy of APG Cardioid based 
graph showed significant improvement for subject recognition. All 10 subjects in APG 
based Cardioid graph achieved 95% average classification accuracy as compared to 85% 
when using PPG based Cardioid graph by applying MLP neural network classifier. 
Similarly, the average classification accuracy is 95% for APG based Cardioid graph and 
70% for PPG signal when using Naïve Bayes classifier. This is due the facts that, APG 
signals contain more information as compared to PPG signals. The wave peaks a, b, c, d 
and e in APG signals are clearly identified in comparison to the diastolic and systolic 
peaks in PPG signals. 
 
5. Conclusion 
In this study, we have demonstrated an accurate and effective idea in identifying 
individuals by using APG based Cardioid graph with the aid of MLP and Naïve Bayes 
classifiers. Results of the experiment shows improvement in terms of classification 
accuracies of APG based Cardioid graph with a total of 95% for both classifiers as 
compared to 85% and 70% when using PPG based Cardioid graph. These results also 
suggest that the correct sample extraction technique plays an important role in 
determining the persistency of the classification accuracy in APG based Cardioid graph. 
Therefore, APG based Cardioid graph biometric identification can become an alternative 
solution for currently available techniques and a complementary method of recognition 
with the present approaches. 
 
References 
[1] 
R. S. Smith and A. Hutching, “Identity Crime and Misuse in Australia Survey”, Australian Institute of 
Criminology for the Attorney-General, (2013). (Accessed online on 8 October 2015). 
[2] 
M. Z. Talib, “Identity Fraud : Platform for Cybercrime”, CyberSecurity Malaysia, (2013), (Accessed 
online on 10 October 2015) http://www.ilkap.gov.my/nlc2013/download/Nota/D2PlenarySession2.pdf. 
[3] 
“The Facts”, (n.d.). (Accessed online on 8 October 2015) ttps://stopidfraud.com.au/what-is-id-fraud/the-
facts. 
[4] 
M. Elgendi, “On the Analysis of Fingertip Photoplethysmogram Signals”, Current Cardiology Reviews, 
(2012), pp. 14-25, 
[5] 
M. Elgendi, I. Norton, M. Brearley, D. Abbott and D. Schuurmans, “Systolic Peak Detection in 
Acceleration Photoplethysmograms Measured”, Emergency Responders in Tropical Conditions, PLOS 
ONE, vol. 8, iss. 10, (2013), pp. 1-11. 
International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016) 
 
 
Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          19 
[6] 
M. Elgendi, M. Jonkman and F. De Boer, “Applying the APG to measure Heart Rate Variability”, 
Computer and Automation Engineering (ICCAE), 2010 The 2nd International Conference, vol. 3, 
(2010), pp. 514-517. 
[7] 
M. Elgendi, M. Jonkman and F. De Boer, “Heart Rate Variability Measurement Using the Second 
Derivative Photoplethysmogram”, Proceedings Springer-Verlag, Biomedical Engineering Systems and 
Technologies, (2010), pp. 82-85. 
[8] 
M. Elgendi, “Preliminary study for localizing c, d and e waves in photoplethysmogram signals”, 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), 36th Annual International Conference of the 
IEEE, (2014), pp. 62-65. 
[9] 
K. Sidek, F. Sufi and I. Khalil, “Data mining technique on Cardioid graph based ECG biometric 
authentication”, Biomedical Engineering 2011, Calgary, Canada, (2011), pp. 53-57. 
[10] F. Sufi, I. Khalil and I. Habib, “Cardioids-based faster authentication and diagnosis of remote 
cardiovascular patients”, Security and Communication Networks, vol. 4, (2011), pp. 1351-1368. 
[11] M. Saeed, M. Villarroel, A. T. Reisner, G. Clifford, L. Lehman, G. B. Moody, T. Heldt, T. H. Kyaw, B. 
E. Moody and R. G. Mark, “Multiparameter intelligent monitoring in intensive care II (MIMIC-II): A 
public-access ICU database”, Critical Care Medicine, vol. 39, no. 5, (2011), pp. 952-960. 
 
 
International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-Technology 
Vol.8, No.3 (2016) 
 
 
20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    Copyright ⓒ 2016 SERSC 
 
