Non-Fiducial PPG-based Authentication for Healthcare Application
Nima Karimian⋆, Mark Tehranipoor, Domenic Forte
Abstract— Biometrics have a great deal of potential in health-
care applications, most notably authentication for medical
record privacy and fraud prevention. In this paper, we examine,
for the first time, non-fiducial feature extraction for photo-
plethysmography (PPG) based authentication. PPG signals have
unique identity properties for human authentication, and are
becoming easier to capture by emerging IoT sensors such
as MaxFast. Different machine learning techniques are used
to compare non-fiducial and fiducial feature extractions. Our
experimental results show that 99.84% accuracy with EER of
1.31% can be achieved based on non-fiducial feature extraction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Biometrics have several benefits to the healthcare indus-
try including prevention of fraud and abuse in entitlement
programs, protection and management of confidential med-
ical records, patient identification, and access control for
medical facilities and equipment [1]. knowledge-based (e.g.,
PIN, password, or possession-based (e.g., smartcard) can
be circumvented by guessing, hacking or theft. Including
biometric technology is much better since it is much more
difficult to fake, steal or imitate. Furthermore, by linking
medical records to biometrics, medical care can be provided
more accurately and efficiently. This capability can also be
invaluable in emergency situations such as when patients are
unresponsive, uncooperative, or unconscious.
An increasing number of applications requiring user au-
thentication are making use of biometric modalities such as
fingerprint, iris, and face. In the healthcare domain, systems
already capture and process certain universal human biolog-
ical signals for heath monitoring. With a few minor tweaks,
the same systems can re-purpose these signals for continuous
human authentication. Among the human biological signals,
electrocardiogram (ECG) and photoplethysmograph (PPG)
are two of the most popular signals for capturing the elec-
trical activity of the heart and changes in blood flow during
heart activity (Fig.1 (a)).
PPG is a particularly simple and low-cost optical technique
that detects blood volume changes in the blood vessels
through measurements at the skin surface. PPG sensors are
included in many different wearable devices today. Unlike
ECG, PPG measurements only need to be acquired from one
side of the body, allowing it to be used in a larger number
of human recognition scenarios.
Gu et al. [2] was the first group to investigate PPG for
user authentication. They considered four feature parameters
and achieved 94% accuracy. More recently, Kavsaolu et al.
⋆ Nima Karimian is with Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269 USA e-mail:
nima@engr.uconn.edu
M. Tehranipoor, and D. Forte are with the Department of Electrical
and Computer Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1: (a) A normal PPG, (b) Power spectrum of PPG.
[3] proposed a feature ranking algorithm based on 40 time
domain features, acquired from first and second derivatives
of the PPG signal and achieved 94.44% accuracy. In 2016,
[4] proposed 12 time domain features from PPG and its
derivatives.
Our goal in this work is to develop more robust approaches
for processing PPGs and use them for authentication purpose.
The above prior work relies on fiducial characteristics (i.e.,
landmarks) obtained from PPG signals in the time domain.
Non-fiducial methods have had better success in biometric
systems for electrocardiogram (ECG) [5] and to our knowl-
edge have not been applied to PPGs. Non-fiducial approaches
take a more holistic approach where features are extracted
statistically based on the overall signal morphology. In this
paper, we evaluate non-fiducial and fiducial approaches for
feature extraction with both supervised and unsupervised
machine learning classification techniques. Non-fiducial ap-
proach achieves 99.75% and 99.84% accuracy for supervised
and unsupervised machine learning respectively.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
The next section will discuss building blocks of a PPG
authentication system including pre-processing and feature
extraction methods. In Section III, two step feature selection
are discussed. Supervised and unsupervised machine learning
methods are described in Section IV. Experiments and results
are discussed in Section V. Finally, the paper is concluded
in Section VI.
II. PROPOSED PPG AUTHENTICATION SYSTEM
Our PPG biometric authentication system is shown in
Figure 2. First, PPG signals are captured by a PPG sensor
and pre-processed to remove noise. Next, peak detection of
the PPG signal is used in order to divide the PPG into differ-
ent segments (beats). After segmentation and normalization,
feature extraction is applied. The resulting features are pro-
cessed by a two-step approach to reduce dimensionality and
correlation. Finally, classification is applied to distinguish
genuine and imposer PPG data.
978-1-5090-4179-4/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE
429
A. Pre-processing
There are various sources of artifacts that interfere with
PPG signal acquisition including baseline wander (BW),
motion artifact (MA), and respiration. PPG signal spans
frequencies between 0.5 Hz to 5 Hz (Fig. 1 (b)). In this
paper, a third order Butterworth band pass filter with cutoff
frequency 1Hz-5Hz was deployed to reduce the effect of
noise. Segmentation is necessary to extract discriminative
features from data as input to classification models. We have
created PPG segments by identifying the systolic peak of
each beat using a modified Pan Tompkins peak detection
algorithm. Since there are variations between segments, we
normalize each segment in terms of maximum amplitude and
time.
Fig. 2: Block diagram of the proposed PPG authentication
system.
B. Feature Extraction
We have divided the feature extraction methods into two
major categories fiducial point methods and non-fiducial
methods which will be discussed below.
Fiducial Features: In fiducial point methods, the most often
used features are based on local landmarks of heart beats
such as temporal or amplitude difference between consec-
utive fiducial landmarks. For PPG, the fiducial features are
often determined from the original PPG signal and its second
derivative. In Fig.1 (a), the main landmarks are shown as a
systolic peak, dicrotic notch, and diastolic peak. The peak
amplitude and their peak times are employed as fiducial
feature. Even with pre-processing, peak detection can be
undependable especially in the case of dicrotic notch and
diastolic peak. For example, age is an important factor that
affects the contour of PPG signals which accelerates the
disappearance of PPG’s dicrotic notch. If the peaks cannot be
extracted at all, the PPG biometric system will require more
segments in order to identify the individual which impacts
its usability and convenience. On the other hand, noise in
the peaks can also impact the accuracy of authentication,
resulting in false positives and false negatives.
Non-Fiducial Features: The wavelet transform is a very
popular technique for biomedical signal processing due to the
fact that it is lightweight and capable of providing time and
frequency information simultaneously. In wavelet transform,
a linear operation transforms the PPG signal by decomposing
it into various scales. The PPG signal is passed through a
series of high and low pass filters in order to analyze both
high as well as low frequency components. The discrete
wavelet transform (DWT) is defined by
y[n] =
∞
∑
k=−∞
x[k]ψ[n−k]
(1)
where the x[k] represents the PPG signal under authentica-
tion.. The set of wavelet functions is usually derived from
the mother wavelet ψ(t) which is dilated by value s = 2 j,
translated by constant τ = k×2 j, and normalized, where the
j, k are integers. A wavelet defined by the solution of a
dilation follows[6]
ψj,k[t] = 1
√sψ[t −τ
s
] =
1
√
2 j φ[2− jt −k]
(2)
where, j is the dilation parameter, or the visibility in fre-
quency, and k is the parameter about the position.
The wavelet coefficients can be obtained by taking the
inner product:
Vφ[j0,k] =
1
√
M ∑
n
PPG[n]φj0,k[n]
(3)
Wψ[j0,k] =
1
√
M ∑
n
PPG[n]ψj,k[n]
j0 ≤ k
(4)
where φ j0,k[n] and ψ j,k[n] are discrete functions. {φ j0,k[n]}k∈z
and {ψj,k[n]}( j,k)∈z2, j≤ j0 are orthogonal to each other. Equa-
tion 3 represents approximation coefficients (CA) while
Equation 4 denotes detailed coefficients (CD). In this paper,
CA and CD are used as the non-fiducial feature vectors. For
this purpose, we have investigated several mother wavelet
transforms, and found Coiflet to be the best.
Fig. 3: Coiflet results based on different PCA dimensions.
III. TWO-STEP FEATURE SELECTION
The resulting feature vector may have correlation and
high dimensionality, which makes it unsuitable for resource-
constrained systems (e.g., wearables) and produces high false
rejection rate. Thus, we have employed a two-step feature
selection in order to reduce the dimension of the features.
In our method, Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS-test) correlation
based filter is applied to remove correlated features. A feature
is considered to be good if it is highly correlated to the
class but not to any other features. Second, Kernel PCA
(KPCA) [7], a nonlinear technique is used for dimensionality
reduction. We have investigated 10,20,30, and 40 dimen-
sions to find the best dimension for our work. We find
that the authentication accuracy improves as dimensionality
decreases. Based on experimental results (Fig. 3), we use a
10 dimensional feature vector for later results.
430
IV. MACHINE LEARNING FOR CLASSIFICATION
Here we have categorized classification techniques into
supervised (SVM) and unsupervised learning (SOM, KNN)
methods.
A. Supervised Learning
Support vector machines (SVMs): SVM has become
one of the most popular supervised learning techniques.
In biometric authentication systems, one-class classification
[8] approach is trained by only one class of data, and
therefore classifiers are designed to distinguish between the
one known class and any other which are unseen during
training. One-class SVM classifiers minimize the volume of
the hypersphere which contains the training data ( Fig. IV
(a)). The hypersphere is defined by center b and a radius
R > 0. Minimizing the size of the hypersphere is equiva-
lent to minimizing R2 as shown in the following quadratic
programming problem:
min
R,b,ξ
R2 + 1
Nν
N
∑
i=1
ξi
(5)
Sub ject to,
||φ( ¯xi)−b|| ≤ R2 +ξi
(6)
Here R and b are parameters determined by solving the
above problem and represent the hypersphere where i =
1,...,N. and ξi ≥ 0,. ξi are “slack” variables that allows
for some points to be within the margin in the scenario of
a nonexistent separating hypersphere. ν can be interpreted
as the margin of the hypersphere used to separate the data.
The goal of the classification problem is learning an optimal
separable hypersphere known as a decision function. For our
purposes, the RBF kernel is used because the Coiflet wavelet
transform feature vectors follow a Gaussian distribution.
(a)
(b)
(C)
Fig. 4: (a) The SVM hypersphere where circles and squares
are unknown (outlier) and known(target) data respectively
and the sphere with solid line represents dividing boundary,
(b) topological structure of k-NN scheme, (c) and structural
graph of SOM neural network where the circles are neurons.
B. Unsupervised Learning
(1) k-nearest-neighbors (k-NN) is based on the minimum
distance of the sample features to the training features.
Consider a set of labeled feature vectors set to train this
classifier, and another set of unlabeled feature vectors used
for test purposes (see Fig. IV (b)). The test set is accepted
when its local density is larger or equal to the local density
of its nearest neighbor in the training set. As can be seen in
Fig. IV (b), the distance from a test data A to its nearest
neighbour Bj is computed and called D1j. Then average
distances of the k nearest neighbors for Bj to its nearest
neighbor in the target sample is computed and called D2.
If D1j/D2 ≥ threshold value, test sample is rejected as
an outlier or else accepted as member of target sample.
This simple method is very efficient, especially in high
dimensional feature spaces.
(2) Self-organizing map (SOM): is a single layer feed-
forward artificial neural network and is trained by an unsu-
pervised clustering method. Input vectors features in SOM
are given to the first layer of the network. The second layer of
the network is the output layer depending on the similarities
among them. The construction of the SOM is such that all
objects in the feature space retain their distance as much
as possible and neighborhood relations in a mapped space
(Fig. IV (c)). Using this feature, SOM can be used for
clustering and classification of the large amount of input
vectors [9]. To evaluate the fitness of test data in this model, a
reconstruction error is considered that defines the difference
between an object and its closest cluster center (neuron) in
the SOM.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Database
In order to evaluate the efficiency of the PPG authen-
tication and the proposed non-fiducial feature extraction,
a publically available Capnobase IEEE TBME benchmark
dataset [10] was used. The raw PPG signals are 8 minutes
long with 300 Hz sample rate for 42 healthy subjects.
B. Metrics for Evaluation
In order to evaluate the performance of PPG authenti-
cation, several experiments were carried out. We divided
the data-set (subject features) into a training and a test set.
The training set is used to train the classifiers and to tune
their parameters. We then test the classifiers on the data that
has not been seen by the classifiers during training time. In
training set, we only consider genuine data (authentic users)
while in the test sets impostors are also included. Here, we
have employed 95% of subjects as an impostor (outlier) and
5% of subjects as genuine (target). Our evaluation metric
involves the false positive/acceptance rate (FPR/FAR) and
the true positive/acceptance rate (TPR/TAR). FAR refers to
the rate at which a classifier incorrectly matches impostor
data (outlier) to the target class. TAR refers to the rate that
a classifier correctly matches the genuine data (target) to the
target class. The two error rates FAR and false negative/reject
rate (FNR/FRR) can be traded-off with each other. At the
cost of missing out some imposers, one can reduce FAR
by making the classifiers less sensitive; at the cost of more
false negatives, one can increase the probability of detecting
intruders. In order to account the usability-security trade off,
we report the equal error rate (EER) in all experiments. This
is the error rate the classifier where FAR equals FRR.
In addition for evaluating the performance of biometric
PPG authentication, receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
and EER curves are considered in this paper (see Fig 5). The
431
ROC curve represents the trade-off between FAR and FRR,
while EER is generally adopted as a unique measure for
characterizing the performance level of a biometric system.
The EER can be seen in the figure where the FAR and FRR
cross each other.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 5: Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) (a) and (c)
Coiflet wavelet, (b) and (d) fiducial feature extraction.
C. Discussion
In our evaluation, the target data is randomly chosen.
For different classification sets with the same percentage
of all the data, we get different results in each iteration.
For characterizing a classification set of a given size, the
experiments were conducted for 50 random trials. Then, the
average, standard deviation (STD) of accuracy, and EER
are calculated. The classification accuracy and EER for the
above approaches are summarized in Table I. Coiflet wavelet
transform (non-fiducial) and fiducial feature extractions with
different classification are considered in our experiments.
Comparing the results of the non-fiducial and fiducial, it can
clearly be seen that non-fiducial has better performance in
terms of accuracy and EER. For example, in Table I, the
standard deviation value of fiducial result is 15.59 which is
much more than non-fiducial one (2.6) since the features are
not recognized well in noisy signals for some of the subjects.
Our observation indicates that unsupervised learning meth-
ods have better performance compared to supervised ones
especially in fiducial feature extraction. It can be observed
that non-fiducial method results in 99.75% of accuracy based
on SVM classifier while fiducial features only succeed in
accuracy of 91.46%. Therefore, as shown in Table I, fiducial
features classification accuracy has a lack of approximately
9% meaning they are more sensitive to noise. This leads to
impact the result although non-fiducial features are far less
dependent on peak detection correctness.
In more details, Fig. 5 (a) & (c) present the ROC curve
results of the authentication for the non-fiducial PPG per-
formance with EER values 1.46%, 1.31%, and 1.70% for
SVM, k-NN, and SOM respectively. Fig. 5 (b) & (d) indicate
the ROC curve results of fiducial PPG authentication with
EER of 15.21%, 9.53%, and 11.52% for SVM, k-NN, and
SOM respectively. The results that are shown in Fig. 5 can
demonstrate that unsupervised learning technique perform
better especially in the case of fiducial feature compared to
supervised learning technique.
TABLE I: Results of authentication
SVM
SOM
KNN
Non-Fiducial
Acc
99.75 ± 0.7
99.65 ± 0.9
99.84 ± 0.4
EER
1.46 ± 2.7
1.70 ± 3.4
1.31 ± 2.6
Fiducial
Acc
91.46 ± 15.24
92.96 ± 15.44
93.76 ± 15.59
EER
15.35 ± 20.22
11.52 ± 15.84
9.53 ± 15.92
Overall, the results of the experiments show that it is
possible to perform PPG biometric authentication without
the use of PPG fiducial detection. The non-fiducial method
provides an efficient, robust, and computationally efficient
authentication technique in healthcare application.
VI. CONCLUSION
Biometrics can protect the confidentiality of medical
records through healthcare provider authentication. In this
paper, we present non-fiducial and fiducial feature extraction
for photoplethysmography (PPG) based authentication. Our
results indicate that two-step feature selection technique can
give a degree of freedom to remove the correlated feature
that may have impact on authentication performance. Su-
pervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques are
considered for authentication evaluation. The experimental
results show that 99.84% accuracy with EER of 1.31% can
be achieved based on non-fiducial feature extraction. This
outperforms the fiducial based approaches is prior work by
a significant margin.
REFERENCES
[1] Marohn, Dana. ”Biometrics in healthcare.” Biometric Technology
Today 14.9 (2006): 9-11.
[2] Gu, Y. Y., Y. Zhang, and Y. T. Zhang., “A novel biometric approach
in human verification by photoplethysmographic signals.” Informa-
tion Technology Applications in Biomedicine,”4th International IEEE
Conference nn EMBS Special Topic, pp. 13–14, 2003.
[3] Kavsaolu, A. Reit, Kemal Polat, and M. Recep Bozkurt., “A novel
feature ranking algorithm for biometric recognition with ppg signals,”
Computers in biology and medicine, vol. 49, PP. 1–14, 2014.
[4] Chakraborty, Samik, and Saurabh Pal., “Photoplethysmogram signal
based biometric recognition using linear discriminant classifier,” 2nd
International Conference on Control, Instrumentation, Energy & Com-
munication (CIEC), pp. 183–187, 2016.
[5] Karimian, N., Guo, Z., Tehranipoor, M., and Forte, D., “Highly reliable
key generation from electrocardiogram (ECG),” IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Engineering , 2016.
[6] D.E.
Newland, “An introduction to random vibrations, spectral &
wavelet analysis,” Courier Corporation, 2012.
[7] Schlkopf, Bernhard, Alexander Smola, and Klaus-Robert Mller., “Ker-
nel principal component analysis,” International Conference on Artifi-
cial Neural Networks., Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 583–588, 1997.
[8] D.M.J.
Tax, et al., “Feature extraction for one-class classifica-
tions,” Artificial Neural Networks and Neural Information Processing-
ICANN/ICONIP pp. 342–349, 2003.
[9] Vesanto, Juha, and Esa Alhoniemi. ”Clustering of the self-organizing
map.” IEEE transactions on neural networks 11.3 (2000): 586-600.
[10] Karlen, W., Raman, S., Ansermino, J. M., and Dumont, G. A., “Multi-
parameter respiratory rate estimation from the photoplethysmogram,”
in IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 60, pp. 1946–
1953, 2015.
432
