 
 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10  No. 1-6 
17 
 
The Study of PPG and APG Signals for Biometric 
Recognition 
 
 
Khairul Azami Sidek, Nur Khaleda Naili Kamaruddin and Ahmad Fadzil Ismail 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,  
Kulliyyah of Engineering, International Islamic University Malaysia, 
53100 Jalan Gombak, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
azami@iium.edu.my 
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays, the numbers of identity theft victims are 
increasing year by year and caused financial losses. This issue 
needs to be dealt with before it becomes worst. Many ways has 
been done in order to decrease the number of identity theft 
victims. For examples, password is needed in order for the valid 
user to access the applications or services and identifications 
card are used for entry in premises. However, these approaches 
have limitations such as easy to be forgotten and lost. Recently, 
bio-signals are getting attention among researchers since it 
marks our vital parts of the body and used in the unimodal 
biometric system. Therefore, this study proposes of a more 
secure mechanism by using PPG and APG signal for biometric 
recognition system.  PPG signals data will be collected from 10 
different subjects by using an Easy Pulse sensor data acquisition 
device. Then, in order to obtain APG signals, the process of 
signal transformation was conducted. Next, preprocessing was 
applied to remove the unwanted signal or noises. After that, the 
features of the PPG and APG signals were extracted. Finally, 
these PPG and APG samples undergo the classification process 
by using classifiers to identify individuals. Based on the 
experimentation 
results, 
PPG 
signal 
obtained 
84% 
identification rates as compared to the result 94% of APG signal 
when using Bayes Network. The next classifier used is 
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) which gives result of 84% and 
92% of PPG signal and APG signal respectively. The other two 
classifiers used are Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) 
and K-Nearest Neighbors (IBk). The achieved result for PPG 
signal is 90% while for APG signal the result is 96% when using 
SMO classifier. Lastly, the obtained result for IBk classifier is 
92% for PPG signal and 94% for APG signal. The outcome of 
this project proved that multimodal biometric can be performed 
by using PPG and APG signal since everyone has different PPG 
and APG signal. 
 
Index 
Terms—APG; 
Multimodal 
Biometric; 
Person 
Identification; PPG. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
In the United State of America (USA), approximately 15 
million residents have their identities misused every single 
year and caused around $50 billion financial loss [1]. There 
are so many systems in this world that require personal 
recognition and the purpose of these systems is to make sure 
that the services only can be accessed by legitimate users. 
However, these systems still can be accessed or hacked by 
impostors. One the alternative to current recognition system 
is biometric. Biometric recognition or biometric refers to the 
automatic authentication or statistical analysis of individuals 
that is based on the individual’s physical or behavioral 
characteristics. A biometric system is use to identify the 
identity of a person that operates by collecting biometric data 
from an individual, extracting the feature sets and comparing 
these discriminative feature set with the template set in the 
database. 
Nowadays, 
biometric 
system 
based 
on 
photoplethysmogram (PPG) signal has been developed. 
Moreover, there is another signal which is acceleration 
plethysmogram (APG) signal that can be analyzed and has 
potential for biometric identification. This waveform is 
initiated from the PPG signal where it is the second derivative 
of PPG. Therefore, this study investigates the relationship of 
the PPG and APG signals in biometric recognition. With the 
identity crime, it is significant strengthen the present security 
methods which is by using a multiple biometric scheme called 
multi-biometric system. 
 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
There are various techniques of analyzing PPG and APG 
signals. In this literature review, it is more focused on the 
PPG and APG signals for biometric recognition. There are 
many ways to analyze the PPG and APG signals to identify 
the identity of a person. 
A study by Gu et al. in [2] proposed a human verification 
approach using PPG signals that can be obtained easily from 
the fingertip. The experimentation of this study was 
performed by examining the PPG signal characteristics. As a 
result, only one out of the 17 different subjects could not be 
verified properly, which generated a 94% of successful rate. 
However, the PPG signal of a human can be distracted due to 
the different physical condition and different weather. 
Moreover, Jaafar et al. in [3] proposed an Acceleration APG 
based biometric identification system. From the PPG signal 
second derivative, the APG signals can be obtained. The 
result of experiment APG signal obtained 97% identification 
rate as compared to the result 55% identification rate of PPG 
signal for the same waveform. Thus, this result recommends 
the usefulness and robustness of APG signals as a biometric 
identification process as compared to PPG signals. However, 
error of this system can occur if the subject is not relax and 
has irregular heartbeats. 
As a conclusion, out of these studies only focuses more on 
single level biometric identification. Thus, this study is about 
the multi-level biometric system based on PPG and APG 
signals where there is another biometric system to valid the 
identification and will increase the security of the biometric 
data of the subjects. 
 
 
Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering 
18 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10 No. 1-6 
 
III. METHODOLOGY 
 
The multimodal biometric system will secure the identity of 
a person since there are two levels in identifying a person’s 
identity. There are many steps in this system that has been 
chosen to recognize identity of a person as shown as in Figure 
1. 
 
 
Figure 1: Multimodal biometric system methodology. 
 
A. Data Collection 
Data collection is the first process of this proposed system. 
In this step, the raw PPG signals were acquired from 10 
different subjects with 60 seconds duration from an Easy 
Pulse sensor device. This device was attached to the subject’s 
fingertip for the measurement and obtaining the PPG signal. 
 
B. Preprocessing (Easy Pulse sensor)  
After the PPG signals were obtained, these data signals 
need to go through preprocessing which to remove additional 
noise in the waveform. Therefore, high pass and low pass 
filters with cutoff frequency of 0.5 Hz and 3.4 Hz respectively 
[4], were applied to remove the noise in the signal which 
already included in the Easy Pulse sensor circuit. 
 
C. Signal Transformation 
The process of signal transformation was performed by 
using the second derivative of PPG signal. After collecting 
the raw PPG signals, this step was required to obtain the APG 
signal by differentiating the PPG data. The mathematical 
expression [5] for this step is shown as in Equation 1.  
 
                              
                        (1) 
 
D. Preprocessing 
After the APG signals were obtained, these data signals 
need to go through preprocessing. The additional noise 
existed after the signal transformation process. This method 
was applied to eliminate unwanted signal in the waveform as 
it will affect the result in identifying a person’s identity. 
Therefore, Butterworth filter with normalized cutoff 
frequency of 0.25 Hz was used to remove the noise in the 
signal.  
 
E. Feature Extraction 
This feature extraction process can be categorized in two 
different phases. The phases were segmentation and 
normalization. 
 
a. Segmentation 
The signals were segmented based on the criteria of the 
amplitude waveform. This segmentation phase was to 
determine the maximum and minimum point of the signals to 
define one PPG and APG cycle. 
 
b. Normalization 
After the segmentation phase, the normalization was 
applied. This phase was used to destroy completely the 
received noise to make a starting point for comparison from 
the PPG and APG signals by leveling it to the same signal 
scale. 
 
 
F. Classification 
Classification is the last procedure of this system which 
used to classify the characteristics of a person’s bio-signals 
which are APG and PPG signal in order to identify the 
legitimate user. There are many classifiers that were used for 
this process which are Bayes Network, Multilayer Perceptron 
(MLP), Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO), and K-
Nearest Neighbors (IBk). 
 
IV. EXPERIMENTATION AND RESULTS 
 
10 different samples were acquired from 10 different 
subjects was the first process which is data collection with 
duration of 60 seconds by using Easy Pulse sensor device. 
However, the PPG data signals have been filtered by using 
high pass and low pass filters. This process is called 
preprocessing. Next, signal transformation was performed to 
obtain APG signal from the second derivative of PPG signal. 
The results of filtered PPG and raw APG signals from subject 
3, 5 and 7 are shown as in Figure 2(a) until Figure 2(c). It can 
be observed that different people have different waveform of 
PPG and APG signals. 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 2(a): Filtered PPG and raw APG signals for Subject 3; (b) Filtered 
PPG and raw APG signals for Subject 5; (c) Filtered PPG and raw APG 
signals for Subject 7. 
 
The Study of PPG and APG Signals for Biometric Recognition 
 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10 No. 1-6 
19 
However, the PPG and APG signals still have additional 
method was applied by using a low pass second order 
Butterworth filter with normalized cutoff frequency of 0.25 
Hz. However, this process was only used for APG signal 
since the PPG signal has been filtered by the high pass and 
low pass filters. The results of filtered PPG and APG signals 
of subject 3, 5 and 7 are shown as in Figure 3(a) until Figure 
3(c) and it can be noticed that the PPG and APG signals are 
smooth waveforms after the noise was filtered. 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 3(a): Filtered PPG and APG signals for Subject 3; (b) Filtered PPG 
and APG signals for Subject 5; (c) Filtered PPG and APG signals for 
Subject 7. 
 
Next, the feature extraction process was applied in order to 
extract the features of the signals. The features that were 
extracted from the PPG signals data are systolic and diastolic 
parts, while the data that were extracted from APG signals are 
from point a up to the point c as shown as in Figure 4. The 
results after this process are shown as in Figure 5(a) until 
Figure 5(c). 
 
 
Figure 4: PPG and APG signals [6]. 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 5(a): Segmented and normalized PPG and APG signals for Subject 
3; (b): Segmented and normalized PPG and APG signals for Subject 5; (c): 
Segmented and normalized PPG and APG signals for Subject 7. 
 
The last process applied is classification process and was 
applied by using WEKA software. There were two different 
datasets which undergo this process which are PPG and APG 
signal dataset. These two datasets were keyed-in into the 
software separately. The results obtained from four different 
classifiers are as shown in Table 1. 
 
Table 1 
Classification accuracies of PPG and APG signals from different classifiers 
 
Classifier 
PPG Classification 
Accuracy 
APG Classification 
Accuracy 
Bayes Network 
84% 
94% 
Multilayer 
Perceptron (MLP) 
84% 
92% 
Sequential Minimal 
Optimization (SMO) 
90% 
96% 
K-Nearest 
Neighbours (IBk) 
92% 
94% 
 
Based on the experimentation result, the classification 
accuracies percentage are different for every classifier for 
PPG and APG signals. Moreover, the percentage APG signal 
classification accuracies are higher than the PPG signal for 
Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering 
20 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10 No. 1-6 
 
four different classifiers. This is because in PPG signal only 
systolic and diastolic peaks were being extracted while for 
APG signal point a up to point c were extracted from the 
features extraction process as shown in Figure 4. Therefore, 
APG signal will give higher identification rates as compared 
to the PPG signal. 
     Thus, from the experimentation results after the five 
processes were used to the PPG and APG signals, it shows 
that these waveforms have the potential to be used for 
biometric identification purposes. Even though these two bio-
signals give different percentage results, the percentage of 
classification accuracies are still high. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
 
This study is about the multimodal biometric system which 
uses PPG and APG signals in identifying identity of the 
individuals. Multimodal biometric system is a two level 
system of biometric and will better secure the identity of a 
person. The result obtained when four different classifiers 
show high classification rates for both PPG and APG signals. 
Therefore, by using multimodal biometric system it is 
anticipated that this system will be better in identifying 
identity of a person since it consist two levels of biometric 
system and it will protect individuals’ identities as compared 
to unimodal biometric system.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
We would like to acknowledge International Islamic 
University Malaysia for providing us the Research Initiative 
Grant Scheme to fund this research. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Identity Theft, “Identity Theft Victim Statistics”, Accessed on 27th 
March 2016, http://www.identitytheft.info/victims.aspx. 
[2] Gu, Y. Y.; Zhang Y:, Zhang, Y. T.; “A Novel Biometric Approach in 
Human Verification by Photoplethysmographic Signals”, 4th Annual 
IEEE Conference on Information Technology Applications, pp 1-2 , 
2003. 
[3] Jaafar, N. A. L.; Sidek K. A.; Mohd Azam, S. N. A.; “Acceleration 
Plethysmogram Based Biometric Identification “, International 
Conference on BioSignal Analysis, Processing and Systems 
(ICBAPS), pp 16-21, 26- 28 May 2015. 
[4] Embedded Lab, “Easy Pulse Sensor Overview”, Accessed on 3rd 
October 2016, http://embedded-lab.com/. 
[5] Dawkins, P.; “Second Derivative for Parametric Equations”, Accessed 
on 
28th 
March 
2016, 
http://tutorial.math.lamar.edu/Classes/CalcII/ParaTangent.aspx. 
[6] Elgendi, M.; Fletcher, R..; Norton, I.; Brearley, B.; Abbott, D.; Lovell, 
N. H.; Schuurmans, D.; “On Time Domain Analysis of 
Photoplethysmogram Signals for Monitoring Heat Stress”, IEEE 
Sensors, 1-4 Nov. 2015.
 
 
 
 
