 
 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10  No. 1-5 
101 
 
Photoplethysmogram Based Biometric 
Identification Incorporating Different Age and 
Gender Group 
 
 
Siti Nurfarah Ain Mohd Azam, Khairul Azami Sidek and Ahmad Fadzil Ismail  
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, 
International Islamic University Malaysia, 53100 Jalan Gombak, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
azami@iium.edu.my 
 
 
Abstract—Biometric is the authentication and identification 
of a person by measuring or estimating their physiological 
characteristics. First generation biometric such as fingerprint, 
signature and voice have drawback and easily can be duplicated 
which lead to serious identity theft crime. Therefore, second 
generation of biometric was introduced by using bio-signal. This 
study evaluates the possibility of applying PPG as biometric 
identification system incorporating different age, gender group, 
and time variability. A total of 36 subjects were involved in this 
study consists of 18 males and 18 females for age difference and 
gender analysis. The PPG signals were taken in resting state by 
using pulse oximeter. The PPG signal was differentiated twice in 
order to form APG signal. These signals then undergo pre-
processing and the segmentation process was done by using 
MATLAB. The highest peaks from the signal was used as 
reference point to determine the appropriate distance for one 
cycle of both signal. Then, the signals were classified by four 
commonly used classifiers which are Bayes Network, Naïve 
Bayes, Multilayer Perceptron, and Radial Basis Function. The 
outcome from this study suggested the accuracy up to 100% for 
different age group, 91.11% for female subjects and 95% for 
male subjects. 
 
Index Terms—Acceleraton Plethysmogram; Biometric; Bio-
Signal; Photopletysmogram. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
It is very crucial and important today that every person’s 
identity and privacy is being protected. The reliability of 
traditional security system have drawbacks and limitations. 
Therefore, biometric recognition system was introduced. 
Traditional authentication system were based on user’s 
knowledge, such as passwords or personal identification 
number (PIN), that can be forgotten, smartcards and cardkey 
can be lost and misplaced which indicates the weakness of 
the traditional systems.  
On the other hand, biometric can provide solution for better 
security system and has been recognize as one of the most 
reliable technologies for future human identification and 
verification [15]. It is believed that biometric can solve many 
of the security issues and have better potential in replacing 
the traditional security methods. 
Biometrics is the authentication and identification of a 
person by measuring or estimating their physiological 
characteristics [13]. According to International Organization 
for Standardization (ISO), biometric is defined as “the 
automated recognition of individual based on their behavorial 
and biological characteristics” [9] 
Numerous biometric measures have been studied for 
identification purposes, however, these method are not the 
same level of system complexity, cost and accuracy. Thus, 
this study will propose the use of PPG signals as biometric 
identification system incorporating different age and gender 
group. PPG signals are low in deployment cost, easy to use, 
smaller in size and conveniently can be used to various parts 
of human body such as finger, ear lobe, wrist or arm [15]. 
Photoplethysmogram (PPG) was previously implemented 
to measure the oxygen saturation, blood pressure, cardiac 
output, and for evaluating autonomic functions. It is a 
promising technology due to its simplicity, low cost and non-
invasiveness. In recent years, PPG signals have been used for 
biometric recognition. However, to the best of our 
knowledge, there have been little research on the 
implementation of PPG signals as a biometric recognition 
system incorporating different age and gender group. The 
feasibility of applying PPG signals as a biological 
discriminant has been preliminary studied. However, the 
underlying issues that governs a practical biometric system 
have not been properly addressed. The objective of this work 
is to increase user acceptability of PPG based biometric 
identification by incorporating gender and age variability. 
Previous works have been more focused on person 
identification using normal subjects without considering 
conditions which could promote fluctuation of PPG signals. 
Therefore, in this study, we will investigate the possibility of 
categorizing individual built upon their PPG morphological 
signal. This technique will improve the current identification 
system by providing a complement which will be able to 
reduce cases involving identity crime. 
 
A. Photoplethysmogram (PPG) 
A photoplethysmograph is a device to optically obtain a 
volumetric measurement of an organ. PPG signals is obtained 
using pulse oximeters to monitor the blood pressure which 
are non-invasive devices. Figure 1 shows how the PPG is 
measured using pulse oximeter and Easy Pulse sensor and 
Figure 2 shows the acquired signal [12]. 
The heart is pumping the blood to all areas of the human 
body by arteries. Blood pressure is pushed against the walls 
of the arteries. Systolic pressure is where the maximum blood 
pressure occurs when the heart is pumping in and diastolic 
pressure is at the lowest blood pressure when the heart is 
resting. Figure 3 shows the location of the systolic and 
diastolic peaks in the PPG signals. The signals imitate the 
fluctuations in blood volume which is triggered by blood 
vessel expansion and contraction [11]. 
Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering 
102 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10 No. 1-5 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Fingertip is attached with pulse oximeter to monitor the blood 
pressure  [1] 
 
 
Figure 2: The acquired PPG signal. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Systolic and diastolic peaks of PPG signals [2] 
 
APG is the second derivative of PPG signal as shown in 
Figure 4 and it is the acceleration of blood which occurs 
inside the finger. 
 
 
 
Figure 4: The APG signal waveform  [2] 
 
The advantage of APG as compared to PPG signal is that 
it consists of 5 peaks which could increase the accuracy of 
biometric identification system. APG signal consists of four 
systolic and one diastolic waves. The waveforms are the a-
wave (early systolic wave), b-wave (early systolic negative 
wave), c-wave (late systolic re-increasing wave), d-wave 
(late systolic re-decreasing wave) and e-wave (early diastolic 
positive wave). Every wave position indicates the closure of 
aortic valve and blood flow which can be used to define and 
observe heart function [3]. 
The remaining sections in this paper are structured as 
follows; the next section review the related biometric 
identification system based on PPG. Later, Section III, 
elaborates more on the technique of the study which 
comprises of data collection, pre-processing, segmentation 
and classification mechanism. In Section IV, the performance 
of the proposed system is discussed. Lastly, in Section V, the 
study is concluded based on the experimentation and 
outcomes from the earlier section. 
 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
 
Current biometric identification system which mostly 
employs the use of fingerprint scan have the possibility to be 
impersonated. Singh et al. in [16] proposed the possibility of 
using PPG as a secondary identification feature to be used 
with the fingerprint scanner. The morphological signal of 
PPG differs from one subject to another however depends on 
the location of the pulse oximeter when the waveform is 
recorded. Therefore, the technique of acquiring PPG signals 
need to be standardized. The data is measured by taking the 
reading of each finger profiles with respect to other finger 
profiles of the same and different subject. The study found 
out that, the correlation of the pulse profile of the same 
subject with the same finger is always higher when compared 
to the same finger with different subject. Besides that, it is 
observed the autocorrelation of the same subject with the 
same finger is mostly higher when compared with the same 
subject with different finger.  
Many researchers recommend the use of PPG signals 
together with other biometric components to enhance the 
security of the system. Unseen internal organs seem to be 
more reliable than visible body parts as the vulnerability and 
the possibility of falsity become the common weakness of 
conventional biometric. Therefore, Salanke et al., in [11] 
also proposed the use of PPG signals as the complementary 
feature to current identification system. The PPG signals 
were recorded with 37 MHz sampling frequency. The 
experiment was conducted with 9 healthy subjects with the 
average age of 34. For each subject, 8 samples were acquired 
where 4 were in relaxed state and the remaining 4 with 
stressed condition. The study aims to identify the changes in 
PPG signals in different states. The results show that, all 
subjects produced identical waveforms during relaxed 
conditions but when distressed, the waveform generated is 
not identical due to motion artifact. Mahalanobis distance is 
used to identify the subjects by generating a matching score 
by the selected features resulting in the smallest distance 
which was considered as a match. However, the study only 
focuses on healthy subjects which at some conditions, this 
technique may not be applicable to people with heart 
abnormalities. 
One of the obstacles faced when recording the PPG signals 
is that there are chances that the signals is being contaminated 
by motion artifact due to the movement of the finger 
connected to the pulse oximeter and surrounding light 
Photoplethysmogram Based Biometric Identification Incorporating Different Age and Gender Group 
 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10 No. 1-5 
103 
variation because of the environment. Thus, in another study, 
Salanke et al., in [17] suggests the method to extract features 
in order to offer better differentiation among subjects by 
applying Fourier series analysis and Semi Discrete 
Decomposition. The normal PPG signal was used for the 
training purpose and the PPG with motion artifacts were used 
for the testing samples after going through pre-processing. 
Matching score was generated by the selected feature then 
Euclidean’s distance was estimated and compared with the 
set of samples stored. The results found out that, after 
applying Fourier series analysis and Semi Discrete 
Decomposition, it gives better outcome in classifying 
individuals. However, the study was limited to only healthy 
subjects and does not state the effect of this method for 
different category of ages. 
The shape and contour of PPG signal is too simple and 
identify the phase change thus make it difficult to analyze. 
Therefore, Sidek et al., [3] suggests an alternative method that 
will assists the original PPG signal analysis which is its 
second derivative also known as APG signal. APG signal 
contain far more information compared to PPG signal as APG 
has 3 peaks more than PPG does. The PPG data were taken 
from public online database with 10 subjects involved. The 
duration of each signals are 10 seconds with sampling 
frequency of 125 Hz. The signals were then differentiated in 
order to obtain APG signal. The available noises from the 
data then undergo pre-processing and were filtered out by 
using Butterworth low pass filter. The signals after that 
segmented by identifying the highest peaks. The same 
amount of points were selected from the peak to the left and 
the right of reference point to complete one cycle of APG 
signal. Next, the signals were normalized.  Later, the data 
were classified by using commonly used classifier Bayes 
Network and K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN). The study 
discovered that, when compared with PPG signal, APG gave 
higher accuracy. However, there was no other parameter and 
variable used for this study which might be the factor that will 
affect the performance accuracy. 
In the past years, there have been many different types of 
biomedical signals introduced as identification system. It is 
proven that, these signals have the ability to identify 
individuals through different mechanisms. APG is believed 
to offer better accuracy as it provides more distinctive 
information 
which 
can 
be 
applied 
for 
biometric 
identification system. Thus, in other study by Sidek et al., in 
[10], a Cardioid based graph method by applying APG signal 
for biometric identification purposes was proposed. The data 
were collected from MIMIC II Waveform, Version 3, Part 2 
and 3, an online public repository available in Physionet  [4]. 
Each recording have 10 seconds of PPG signal with the 
sampling rate of 125 Hz. In order to obtain APG signal, the 
PPG is differentiated twice and then the signals were pre-
processed by using low pass filter to reduce the noise. The 
APG is then segmented by identifying one complete cycle of 
the signal. Then, the Cardioid loop was formed. The center 
and the Euclidean distance of the Cardioid were then 
calculated. For classification, the data were classified by 
using Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and Naïve Bayes. The 
results showed that, APG gave higher percentage accuracy 
when compared with PPG signal thus conclude that APG is 
better than PPG for biometric identification purposes. 
However, this study did not consider any external factor such 
as age of the subjects, health conditions, and gender. 
Nevertheless, most of the related works only focuses on 
how to obtain high accuracy of the system but neglecting 
some important variables that need to be considered. Relative 
to these findings, different age group effect on the robustness, 
reliability and accuracy of subject recognition is a 
substantially fundamental issue for PPG biometric as 
applications are becoming more diversified. Thus, the 
robustness of PPG samples towards different age and gender 
group is a pertinent area which is a uniquely under-
researched. 
 
III. METHODOLOGY 
 
Figure-5 summarizes the proposed identification system 
which consists of the data collection, pre-processing, 
segmentation, signal differentiation, and classification stages. 
Each stage will be elaborated further in the next sub-sections. 
 
Figure 5. Proposed Identification System 
 
A. Signal Acquisition 
A total of 36 subjects participated in the experiment 
involving 18 males and 18 females with different age divided 
into 9 groups as shown in Table 1. The PPG signals were 
measured by using Easy Pulse sensor. PPG signals of 5 
different cycles were collected from each subject with 
sampling rate of 360 Hz. Each sample of the PPG signal was 
recorded for 15 seconds.  
Table 1 
Group division for every age range 
 
Group 
Age range (years) 
A 
6-10 
B 
11-15 
C 
16-20 
D 
21-25 
E 
26-30 
F 
31-35 
G 
36-40 
H 
41-45 
I 
46-50 
 
B. Pre-processing 
The raw PPG signals contain unwanted signals such as 
noise and baseline wandering which is produced from the 
environment factor during the PPG data collection procedure. 
For the pre-processing stage, Butterworth filter is used to 
filter out these unwanted signals to obtain as accurate data as 
possible. The filter is a form of signal processing technique 
which intends to gain as flat a frequency response as possible 
in the pass band and also denoted to as a maximally flat 
magnitude filter. The choice of Butterworth as a filter is 
because the advantage is it results in smooth, monotonically 
decreasing frequency response. 
 
C. Feature Extraction 
The segmentation process of the PPG signal is done by 
using MATLAB. One complete cycle of PPG signal is 
segmented part by part through using specific algorithm. The 
procedure begins by detecting the systolic peak and making 
it the pivot since it signifies to the highest and most clear 
peak in a PPG signal. The highest peak of the signal is set as 
Signal 
Acquisition
Pre-
processing
Feature 
Extraction
Classification
Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering 
104 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10 No. 1-5 
 
the reference point as illustrated in Figure 7. Based on the 
reference point, 40 points were selected to the left and 60 
points to the right of the waveform. 
 
Figure 6: Segmentation of PPG signal. 
 
The steps is repeated in different time instances to collect 
more PPG signals for every subject that would characterize 
enrolment and recognition datasets. The points taken will be 
used for classification later. This procedure is the same for 
the APG signal. When the APG signal is acquired, the highest 
peak becomes the reference point and from the point, 20 
points were selected to the left and 40 points to the right of 
the waveform. 
 
D. Signal Differentiation 
Second order differentiation is performed after acquiring 
PPG data to produce the APG signal. In the preliminary stage, 
the PPG is denoted as x is differentiated to obtain the 
differentiated values denoted as y shown in Equation 1. 
 
)
(
)1
(
)
(
n
x
n
x
m
y



                      
(1) 
 
where m = 1, 2, 3, . . . , (N − 1) and y(m) is the differentiated 
PPG signals. 
 
)
(
2
2
dx
y
x
dx
y





                                   
(2) 
 
APG signal is produced when the second order derivative is 
performed as shown in Equation (2). 
 
E. Classification 
For classification purpose, four different types of classifier 
will be used in this study that are Bayes Network, Naïve 
Bayes, Multilayer Perceptron and Radial Basis Function to 
evaluate the accuracy of proposed system. The signals will be 
classified by using open source software named Weka  [5] 
 
IV. EXPERIMENTATION AND RESULTS 
 
Figures 7 to 21 illustrate the steps of the feature extraction 
stage. Figure 7 to 9 illustrate the PPG and APG signals for 
three different subjects with various age group and dissimilar 
gender. Subject 14 (Group D) and Subject 25 (Group G) are 
males with age 21 and 36 years old whereas Subject 19 
(Group E) is a female with age of 26 years old. Figures 7(a), 
8(a), and 9(a) show the raw PPG signal of Subject 14, 
Subject 25 and Subject 19. 
 
Figure 7: (a) Raw PPG signal for Subject 14, (b) Filtered PPG signal for 
Subject 14, and (c) APG signal for Subject 14. 
 
 
Figure 8: (a) Raw PPG signal for Subject 25, (b) Filtered PPG signal for 
Subject 25, and (c) APG signal for Subject 25. 
 
 
Figure 9: (a) Raw PPG signal for Subject 19, (b) Filtered PPG signal for 
Subject 19, and (c) APG signal for Subject 19 
 
Figure 7(b), 8(b) and  (b) show the filtered PPG signal of 
each subjects. The purpose of filtering is to obtain as flat 
magnitude frequency as possible and also to remove 
unwanted noise that might affect the preciseness of the 
experiment. Next, after the filtering process was done, the 
PPG signal is differentiated twice in order to produce APG 
signal as shown in Figure 7(c), 8(c) and 9(c). After that, the 
reference point (marked by the red circles) for the PPG and 
APG signal were determine by identifying the highest peak 
from each signal. This step is shown in Figure 10, 11, and 12 
for PPG signal and Figure 13, 14 and 15 for APG signal.  
 
 
 
Figure 10: Reference point of PPG signal for Subject 14 
Photoplethysmogram Based Biometric Identification Incorporating Different Age and Gender Group 
 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10 No. 1-5 
105 
 
 
Figure 11: Reference point of PPG signal for Subject 25. 
 
 
 
Figure 12: Reference point of PPG signal for Subject 19. 
 
 
 
Figure 13: Reference point of APG signal for Subject 14. 
. 
 
 
Figure 14: Reference point of APG signal for Subject 25. 
 
 
 
Figure 15: Reference point of APG signal for Subject 19. 
 
Each of the signals was segmented together as described 
in Figure 16 to 21 These signals were overlapped with each 
other in order to observe the pattern. 
 
Figure 16: Segmentation of PPG signal for Subject 14. 
 
Figure 17: Segmentation of PPG signal for Subject 25. 
 
Figure 18: Segmentation of PPG signal for Subject 19. 
 
 
Figure 19: Segmentation of APG signal for Subject 14. 
 
 
Figure 20: Segmentation of APG signal for Subject 25. 
 
Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering 
106 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10 No. 1-5 
 
Figure 21: Segmentation of APG signal for Subject 19. 
 
The PPG and APG signals were separated into two 
categories which are age and gender. Figure 22 and 23 show 
the classification results for PPG and APG signal based on 
age group. Figure 24 and 25 illustrate the classification 
outcomes for PPG and APG waveform subject to gender. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 22: Classification accuracy of PPG signal based on age group. 
 
Figure 22 describe the classification accuracy of PPG 
signal based on different age group by applying BN, NB, 
MLP and RBF network as classifiers. It can be observed that, 
the accuracy of groups A, B, G and H are slightly lower when 
compared to groups C, D, E, F and I. Groups C, D, F, and I 
gave the accuracy as high as 100% for all four type of 
classifiers.  
Groups A and B were individuals with age of 6 to 15 years 
old where they are children and young teenagers. The results 
show that, the accuracy of PPG signal was inconsistent. 
However, they manage to achieve the accuracy up to 95%. 
The classification accuracy of their PPG signal might be 
affected by their skin. Children and early teenagers have 
thinner skin  [6] compared to adult thus could affect the 
accuracy of the PPG readings as the signals are obtained 
using pulse oximeters where the device is attached onto the 
index finger to monitor the blood pressure. In addition, their 
epidermis is thinner and under-keratinized as compared with 
adults. Groups C, D, E, and F were individuals with age of 
16 to 35 years old where they are late teenagers and adults. 
The classification accuracy within these groups was constant 
and stable. The results might be influenced by the heart 
respiratory rate as adult’s heart rate is lower and calmer.  
Besides that, groups G, H and I were individuals with age 
of 36 to 50 years old where they are classed as middle 
adulthood. However, based on the results, only groups G and 
H were less constant in accuracy. As human grows older, 
middle age adults experience numerous physical changes 
which leads to cultivation of wrinkles, depletion of organs 
functions and also the decrease of the lung and heart 
capabilities  [7]. Thus, the preciseness of the PPG signal 
might be affected due to the changes experienced by middle 
age adults. Therefore, it can be concluded that, PPG signal 
based biometric identification system is most suitable to be 
implemented for person from groups C, D, E and F as their 
PPG signals are stable and more consistent as compared to 
other groups. 
 
 
Figure 23: Classification accuracy of APG signal based on age group. 
 
Figure 23 demonstrates the classification accuracy of APG 
signal based on different age group. From the table and 
figure, it is clearly seen that the results are inconsistent for 
each group and classifier. Only Group I gave 100% accuracy 
and Group B gave constant results. Nevertheless, the results 
obtained are more than 90% accuracy which means that the 
APG signal is reliable to be applied for person recognition.  
The inconsistency in the classification accuracy might be 
due to the number of peaks of APG signal. Some of the peaks 
are visible and some are not visible thus affecting the 
preciseness of the outcomes. Based on the figure, it can be 
concluded that, for APG signal, groups B and I are most 
suitable to be applied as biometric identification system 
because of the stability in classification accuracy.  
On the other hand, for the APG to be applied as biometric 
identification method, it can be suggested that MLP and RBF 
networks can be applied as they give higher accuracy when 
compared to other type of classifier. MLP has the ability to 
derive from incomplete data and can be used to extract 
patterns. The ability of MLP to learn makes it very flexible 
and powerful. RBF network are able to give high accuracy 
because it is more intuitive compared to other type of neural 
network and much easier to be designed and trained. 
Therefore, this method can be applied for person recognition 
even with different age group.  
Based on the results, it shows that both PPG and APG are 
reliable as biometric identification system despite of various 
ages. The PPG signal gave better accuracy for groups C, D, 
E, and F thus it is suggested that this technique should be 
applied for individuals within this age group in order to 
obtain high precision. For APG signal, MLP and RBF should 
be implemented as the accuracy for both classifiers are better 
than NB and BN.  
 
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
Classification accuracy of PPG signal based on age 
group.
BN (%)
NB (%)
MLP (%)
RBF (%)
85
90
95
100
105
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
Classification accuracy of APG signal based on age 
group.
BN (%)
NB (%)
MLP (%)
RBF (%)
Photoplethysmogram Based Biometric Identification Incorporating Different Age and Gender Group 
 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10 No. 1-5 
107 
 
 
Figure 24: Classification accuracy of PPG signal based on gender. 
 
Figure 24 describes the classification of PPG signal based 
on gender by using different type of classifiers. It is clearly 
presented that, male subjects gave higher accuracy when 
compared to female subjects. In average adults, the human 
heart beats approximately 70 to 85 times per minutes. The 
average male heart rate is between 70 to 72 beats per minute 
whereas the average for women is around 78 to 82 beats. The 
difference in heart rate is due to the shape for the heart where 
female’s heart is smaller compared to male’s heart which 
resulting in the less blood pumping by the heart  [8]. The 
lower accuracy of the PPG signal for female subjects may be 
due to the inability of the pulse oximeter to identify the most 
accurate blood volume of the heart. Based on the results from 
the experimentation, RBF network gave higher outcomes of 
95% for male subjects and 84.44% for female subjects when 
compared to BN, NB, and MLP. Therefore, in order to apply 
PPG signal for biometric purposes, RBF is the most 
appropriate classifier as it gave better results in accuracy. 
 
 
 
Figure 25: Classification accuracy of APG signal based on gender. 
 
Figure 25 shows the classification accuracy of APG signal 
based on gender by using various type of classifiers which 
are BN, NB, MLP, and RBF network. Male subjects gave 
higher accuracy compared to female subjects when NB and 
BN were applied. However, it was different for MLP and 
RBF. For MLP, the female subjects gave the accuracy of 
85.56% and male subjects of 83.43% slightly lower than 
female subject. RBF network gave the accuracy of female 
subjects of 91.11% as compared to male subjects of 89.5%. 
The increment in accuracy might be due to the total number 
of peaks provided by the APG signal as explained in Section 
2.3.4 as it has more visible feature to be extracted. Therefore, 
in order to apply biometric for APG signal based on gender, 
RBF network is the most suitable classifier to be used as it 
can reach accuracy as high as 91.11%.  
Based on the outcomes, PPG and APG signals can be used 
as a biometric identification system regardless of different 
gender. RBF network is the proper classifier to be applied as 
it gave the highest accuracy results which is important in 
person recognition system. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
 
A new potential substrate named BV board was developed. 
The characteristics of electrical properties were measured, 
analyzed and presented in this paper. Furthermore, the 
obtained results for BV board were compared with familiar 
existing substrate which is a FR-4 substrate. The results show 
BV board has more consistencies as compared to the FR-4 
substrate. It is suggested to use BV in microwave application 
such as designing a patch antenna. For further study, other 
characteristics such as strength, breakdown voltage and water 
absorption of BV board will be evaluated. This is important 
in order to determine prospect of the board to be used in other 
applications such as insulation of electrical devices. In 
addition, a patch antenna would be developed onto this BV 
substrate in order to observe the real performance of this 
substrate in microwave application. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
We would like to acknowledge International Islamic 
University Malaysia for providing us the Research Initiative 
Grant Scheme to fund this research. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Bhatt, "EASY PULSE SENSOR (VERSION 1.1) OVERVIEW 
(PART 1)," 20 April 2013. [Online]. Available: http://embedded-
lab.com/blog/easy-pulse-version-1-1-sensor-overview-part-1/. 
[2] M. Elgendi, J. Mirjam and D. B. Friso, "Applying the APG to measure 
heart rate variability," In Computer and Automation Engineering 
(ICCAE), 2010 The 2nd International Conference, vol. 3, pp. 514-517, 
2010.  
[3] K. A. Sidek, N. I. Zainal, S. N. A. Mohd Azam and N. A. L. Jaafar, 
"The development of human biometric identification using acceleration 
plethysmogram," ARPN Journal of Engineering and Applied Sciences, 
2015.  
[4] A. L. Goldberger, L. A. N. Amaral, L. Glass, J. M. Hausdorff, P. C. 
Ivanov, R. G. Mark, J. E. Mietus, G. B. Moody, C.-K. Peng and H. E. 
Stanley, "(PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet): Components 
of a New Research Resource for Complex Physiologic Signals," 20 
June 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://circ.ahajournals.org/content/101/23/e215.full. 
[Accessed 
12 
November 2016]. 
[5] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann and I. H. 
& Witten, "The WEKA data mining software: an update.," SIGKDD 
Explorations, pp. 10-18, 2009.  
[6] C. H. Raine, C. A. Lee, D. R. Strachan, C. T. Totten and S. Khan, "Skin 
flap thickness in cochlear implant patients—a prospective study.," 
Cochlear implants international., 2013.  
[7] Y. Wang, A. E. Wluka, J. A. Simpson, G. G. Giles, S. E. Graves, R. N. 
De Steiger and F. M. & Cicuttini, "Body weight at early and middle 
adulthood, weight gain and persistent overweight from early adulthood 
are predictors of the risk of total knee and hip replacement for 
osteoarthritis.," Rheumatology, 2013.  
[8] W. Rosernburg, "What Is the Difference Between Male & Female 
Heart 
Rates?," 
16 
August 
2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.livestrong.com/article/208145-what-is-the-difference-
between-male-female-heart-rates/. 
[9] International Organization for Standard, "ISO/IEC JTCI SC37 
Standing Document 2, version 8, Harmonized Biometric Vocabulary, 
1997.  
[10] K. A. Sidek, M. Osman and S. N. A. Mohd Azam, "Development of an 
Acceleration Plethysmogram based Cardioid Graph Biometric 
Identification," International Journal of Bio-Science and Bio-
Technology, pp. 9-20, 2015.  
[11] N. G. R. Salanke, N. Maheswari, S. Andrews and S. Sadhasivam, 
"Enhancement in the design of biometric identification system based 
on photoplethysmography data," in Green High Performance 
Computing (ICGHPC), 2013.  
[12] A. Bonissi, R. D. Labati, L. Perico, R. Sassi, F. Scotti and L. & 
Sparagino, "A Preliminary Study on Continuous Authentication 
70
80
90
100
BN (%)
NB (%)
MLP (%)
RBF (%)
Classification accuracy of PPG signal based on gender
Male
Female
70
80
90
100
BN (%)
NB (%)
MLP (%)
RBF (%)
Classification accuracy of APG signal based on gender.
Male
Female
Journal of Telecommunication, Electronic and Computer Engineering 
108 
e-ISSN: 2289-8131   Vol. 10 No. 1-5 
 
Methods for Photoplethysmographic Biometrics," in Proceedings of 
the 2013 IEEE Workshop on Biometric Measurements and Systems for 
Security and Medical Applications (BioMS), 2013.  
[13] G. H. Zhang, C. P. Carmen and Y. T. and Zhang, "A biometric based 
security solution for encryption and authentication in tele-healthcare 
systems," in Applied Sciences in Biomedical and Communication 
Technologies, 2009.  
[14] A. Voss, R. Schroeder, C. Fischer, A. Heitmann, A. Peters and S. & 
Perz, "Influence of age and gender on complexity measures for short 
term heart rate variability analysis in healthy subjects," in 2013 35th 
annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine 
and biology society (EMBC), 2013.  
[15] P. Spachos, G. Jiexin and D. and Hatzinakos, "Feasibility study of 
photoplethysmographic signals for biometric identification," 17th 
International Conference on Digital Signal Processing (DSP), pp. 1-5, 
2011.  
[16] M. Singh and S. Bansal, "Automatic Feature Extraction in Accelaration 
Plethysmography," International Journal of Computer Science and 
Communication, pp. 1-9, 2014.  
[17] N. G. R. Salanke, N. Maheswari and S. and Andrews, "An Enhanced 
Intrinsic Biometric in Identifying People by Photopleythsmography 
Signal," in Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on 
Signal and Image Processing, 2012.
 
 
 
 
