Acceleration Plethysmogram Based  
Biometric Identification 
 
Nur Azua Liyana Jaafar, Khairul Azami Sidek and Siti Nurfarah Ain Mohd Azam 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Faculty of Engineering, International Islamic University Malaysia 
53100 Jalan Gombak, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
azami@iium.edu.my 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents the feasibility study of 
Acceleration 
Plethysmogram 
(APG) 
based 
biometric 
identification system. APG signals are obtained from the second 
derivative of the Photoplethysmogram (PPG) signal. It has been 
reported from previous literature that APG signals contain more 
information as compared to the PPG signal. Thus, in this paper, 
the robustness and reliability of APG signal as a biometric 
recognition mechanism will be proven. APG signals of 10 subjects 
were acquired from the Multiparameter Intelligent Monitoring 
in Intensive Care II Waveform Database (MIMIC2WDB) which 
contains PPG signals with a sampling frequency of 125 Hz. The 
signals were later converted into an APG waveform. Then, 
discriminating features are extracted from the APG morphology. 
Finally, these APG samples were classified using commonly 
known classification techniques to identify individuals. Based on 
the experimentation results, APG signal when using Bayes 
Network gives an identification rate of 97.5 percentage as 
compared to PPG signal of 55 percentage for the same waveform. 
This outcome suggests the feasibility and robustness of APG 
signals as a biometric modality as compared to PPG signals. 
Keywords— 
APG 
signal; 
Biometric; 
Bayes 
Network; 
MIMIC2WDB; PPG signal. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
In today’s world, people are becoming more insecure when 
it comes to giving their personal information to a third party. 
This is because they are afraid that other people might misuse 
their credentials for illegal purposes as today’s crimes such as 
identity theft has increased rapidly in the past years. A survey 
conducted by UNISYS Security Index in 2014 showed that 
identity crime is an increasingly alarming issue across the 
globe [1]. The report reveals that 86 % of Mexicans are 
seriously concerned about identity theft whereas 78 % of 
Malaysians are very disturbed about unauthorized access to or 
misuse of their personal information. Additionally, in 
Australia and the United Kingdom, more than 51 % of people 
are worried about their personal credentials when involving 
any transactions which include personal credentials [1]. One of 
the key strategies to combat identity crime is to implement 
biometric system. 
Recently, the usage of biological signals such as 
Photoplethysmogram (PPG) signals for the purpose of 
biometric recognition has been implemented [2, 3]. PPG signal 
has its own characteristics and features that portray a person’s 
identity. However, the contour of the PPG waveform as shown 
in Fig 1 is very simple yet difficult to analyze and detect the 
phase changes of the contour.  
 
Fig 1: PPG waveform [4] 
 
Hence, it requires other alternative methods that might 
assist the interpretation process of the PPG. Elgendi in [4] 
introduced the second derivative of PPG signal that may 
facilitate the analysis of the original PPG signal which is called 
acceleration plethysmogram (APG) signal as illustrated in Fig 
2.   
 
Fig 2: APG waveform [4] 
 
APG is an indication of the acceleration of the blood in the 
finger. It has been reported from previous literature that APG 
signal contains more information such as visible phase change 
as compared to the PPG signal [5-9].  
Singh and Nagpal explained the shape of APG signal 
consisting of seven different types where each type represents 
different condition of a person’s heart [5]. Elgendi et. al. 
proposed 
the 
method 
of 
calculating 
the 
heart 
rate
2015 International Conference on BioSignal Analysis, Processing and Systems (ICBAPS)
978-1-4799-6879-4/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
16
variability using the detection of a-wave interval in APG 
waveform [6]. Nousou et. al. developed a diagnosis assistance 
system that uses APG signal acquired from the fingertip of a 
person to diagnose in a short period of time [7]. Rozi et. al. 
experimented the effects of exercise towards APG wave shapes 
[8]. Baek et. al. implemented second derivative of PPG to 
monitor the arterial condition [9].  
However, previous researches on APG signal were focused 
on clinical purposes. Little has been said about the application 
of APG in identifying individuals. Thus, this study will be 
focusing on the implementation of APG signal for biometric 
identification purposes.  The feasibility of the biometric system 
is investigated in this research.  
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows; the 
next section describes the methodology of the study. Later, 
Section III elaborates about the classification performance of 
APG signal when applied to commonly used classification 
techniques. And finally in Section IV, the conclusion is layed 
out based on the experimentation and results in the previous 
section. 
II. SYSTEM AND METHOD 
The general architecture of our proposed system begins with 
signal acquisition of the PPG recordings, followed by the 
second differentiation of the PPG samples, then the pre-
processing stage and later the extraction of APG signals as 
unique 
features 
by 
performing 
normalization 
and 
segmentation on the PPG data.  Finally, these extracted 
features are applied to commonly used classifiers for 
identification purposes. The proposed identification system is 
summarized as in Fig 3 and these steps are briefly discussed in 
the next sub-sections. 
 
 
Fig. 3. The Proposed APG Based Biometric Identification System 
 
A. Signal Acquisition 
In this study, we acquired PPG signals taken from 10 
different subjects. These recording were obtained from 
Physionet with duration of ten seconds each [10, 11]. These 
samples were fetched from the Multiparameter Intelligent 
Monitoring in Intensive Care II Waveform Database 
(MIMIC2WDB) which contains multiple physiologic signals 
collected from bedside patient monitors in adult and neonatal 
intensive care units (ICUs). These physiologic signals include 
PPG signals which were sampled at 125 Hz with 8-bit 
resolution. 
B. Signal Differentiation 
After collecting the PPG data, second order differentiation is 
performed to produce the APG signal. In the preliminary 
stage, the PPG data, which is denoted as x is differentiated to 
obtain the differentiated values denoted as y in Equation 1. 
 
   
)
(
)1
(
)
(
n
x
n
x
m
y
−
−
=
                       (1) 
 
where m = 1, 2, 3, . . . , (N − 1) and y(m) is the differentiated 
PPG signals. 
 
)
(
2
2
dx
y
x
dx
y
∂
∂
∂
=
∂
                                (2) 
 
Next, the differentiated values are again differentiated to 
produce the second order derivative as in Equation 2 and 
construct the APG signal. 
C. Pre-processing 
The output of the differentiation process is converted to an 
APG signal. However, the signal is not clean and artifacts are 
prevalent in the waveform. Thus, a Butterworth low pass filter 
is used to mitigate the noise factor. Then, discriminant features 
are extracted to act as the input for the classifiers. 
D. Biometric Sample Extraction 
This stage is divided into two main steps which are 
segmentation and normalization. 
i. 
Segmentation 
Once APG signals have been acquired, it is segmented 
based on the amplitude characteristic of the wave. The 
procedure begins by identifying the a wave and making it the 
pivot since it represents to the highest and most obvious peak 
in an APG signal. From the a wave, equal numbers of data 
points are selected to the right and left of this reference. We 
repeat the previous steps in different time instances to collect 
more APG signals for every subject which would represent 
enrolment and recognition datasets. 
 
ii. Normalization 
After PPG samples have been segmented, normalization is 
applied to eradicate inherited artifacts due to baseline wanders 
from the PPG signal by leveling it to a common scale. By 
doing so, it would be much easier to analyze similarities of 
PPG signals. This technique is defined in Equation 3. 
 
x
x
n
x
N
ion
Normalizat
μ
−
=
,
                  (3) 
where x is the PPG data, µx is the mean value of x and nx is the 
data points in x. These normalized PPG samples then acts as 
the input for the classifiers. 
2015 International Conference on BioSignal Analysis, Processing and Systems (ICBAPS)
978-1-4799-6879-4/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
17
E. Classification 
Classification is a fundamental task in pattern recognition 
that involves the formation of a classifier. The induction of 
classification algorithms from data of pre-classified instances 
is a central issue in data mining. Various techniques to this 
problem are based on numerous functional representations 
such as decision trees, neural networks, decision graphs, and 
rules [12]. In this paper, we use two commonly applied 
classification method to identify the class labels for instances, 
each typically described by a set of features (attributes) for the 
APG signals. The classifiers are Bayes Network and k Nearest 
Neighbour. These induction algorithms are briefly discussed 
in the following sub-sections. 
 
i. 
Bayes Network 
In order to apply Bayesian Network as a 
classification algorithm, we compute argmaxy P(y|x) using the 
probability distribution, P(U) denoted as in Equation 4 
 
P(y | x) = P(U) / P(x) α P(U)                          (4) 
 
where y = x0, the class variable given a set of variables x = x1, 
x2, …, xk called APG attributes. A classification algorithm, h : 
x → y is a function that maps instances of x to values of y. 
Since all variables in x are identified, we calculate 
Equation 4 for all class values. The Bayesian Network first 
learns the network structure and the probability tables. Once a 
reliable network structure is known, the conditional 
probability tables for each of the variables can be 
approximated. 
 
ii. 
K Nearest Neighbour 
k Nearest Neighbour is an instance based learning 
algorithm. It defines the hypotheses from the training 
instances and is able to adhere its model to previously 
unrecorded data. It operates by obtaining the nearest 
neighbour or the majority class among k neighbours. In other 
words, it finds the most similar element to a given query 
element with similarity defined by the Euclidean distance. The 
algorithm is determined locally and all computation is 
deferred until the classification step. The aim of the algorithm 
is to determine the class of a new case based on the class of 
the k most similar database elements [13]. 
 
Assume vector 
〉
〈
)
(
,
x
f
x
 where f(x) is the function for each 
instance x which can be represented by the feature vector 
〉
〈
)
(
,
),
(
),
(
2
1
x
y
x
y
x
y
n
…
 
 
where yn(x) is the value of the nth attribute of instance x. The 
Euclidean distance is shown in Equation 5. 
∑
=
−
=
n
r
j
r
i
r
j
i
x
y
x
y
x
x
d
1
2
))
(
)
(
(
)
,
(
            (5) 
 
where d(xi, xj) is the distance between two instances, xi and xj. 
Then, find 
)
(ˆ
qx
f
which is the value of the output of the 
classification algorithm as denoted in Equation 6. 
∑
=
∈
=
k
i
i
V
v
q
x
f
v
x
f
1
))
(
,
(
max
arg
)
(ˆ
δ
          (6) 
where δ(a,b) = 1 if a = b and where δ(a,b) = 0. The value 
)
(ˆ
qx
f
 is also an approximate of f(xq) among k training 
dataset closest to x. 
 
III. EXPERIMENTATION AND RESULTS 
Figures 5 and 6 illustrates the identification process of 
subject 2 and 4 which are collected signals of two subject 
among approximately 13 500 ICU patients undergoing the first 
three stages of our proposed biometric recognition system as 
elaborated in Section II. As we can observe from the 
waveforms of the APG signals of these two subjects, it can be 
seen that the morphological wave shapes are distinguishable as 
compared to a PPG signal. It would be difficult to discriminate 
the peaks in a PPG signal specifically the diastolic peak as it 
would resemble the diastolic slope as shown in Fig 1. 
However, the systolic and diastolic peaks are prevalent and 
obvious in an APG signal as shown in Fig 4. The clear 
waveform obtained from the second derivation of PPG signal 
enable the visualization of individual features to be detected 
and analyzed easily. 
 
 
Fig. 4. APG waveform with distinguishable systolic and diastolic 
peaks consisting of a, b, c, d and e waves. 
 
2015 International Conference on BioSignal Analysis, Processing and Systems (ICBAPS)
978-1-4799-6879-4/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
18
 
 
Fig. 5. (a) Raw PPG signal acquired from Subject 2 (b) Unfiltered APG signal and (c) Filtered APG signal of Subject 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. (a) Raw PPG signal acquired from Subject 4 (b) Unfiltered APG signal and (c) Filtered APG signal of Subject 4. 
 
 
2015 International Conference on BioSignal Analysis, Processing and Systems (ICBAPS)
978-1-4799-6879-4/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
19
The waveform of APG signal consists of four systolic 
waves and one diastolic wave which are the a-wave (early 
systolic wave), b-wave (early systolic negative wave), c-wave 
(late systolic re-increasing wave), d-wave (late systolic re-
decreasing wave) and e-wave (early diastolic positive wave). 
Each wave location reflects the closure of aortic valve and 
blood flow which can be used to monitor cardiac function. 
The following stages of our proposed identification system 
are followed by the segmentation and normalization 
procedures. The implementation of these steps for subjects 2 
and 4 are shown in figures 7 and 8. In these figures, different 
APG signals were acquired from varying time instances which 
were selected randomly. 
 
 
Fig 7: Subject 2’s segmented and normalized APG signals 
 
  
Fig 8: Subject 4’s segmented and normalized APG signals 
 
Recalling from Section II, we have tested our recognition 
approach by using 10 subjects from MIMIC2WDB. The APG 
for each subject comprises of 4 complete APG cycles, each 
representing 4 different instances. Therefore, the classification 
procedure was performed on 40 instances in total. Out of these 
4 instances for a single subject, 2 instances are regarded as the 
enrolment samples whereas the remaining half is the 
recognition data. Later, a ten-fold cross validation method 
which assesses the generalization accuracy of the classification 
algorithms was implemented on the attributes to classify the 
subjects. 
For 
our 
experimental 
analysis, 
we 
evaluated the 
classification accuracy as our performance metrics as it is a 
statistical measure on how efficient a classification algorithm 
correctly identifies individuals. In order to show the reliability 
of APG signals in comparison to PPG signals, we computed 
accuracy rates for both signals applying Bayes Network and k 
Nearest Neighbour. We used both signals (PPG and APG) 
from the same subject in the same time instance. For example, 
the PPG signals were obtained for a ten second duration. Thus, 
the APG signal was converted using the same ten second 
period from the same PPG signal as shown in figs 4 (a), 4(c), 
5(a) and 5(c). 
Based on the experimentation results, we found out that the 
classification accuracies of APG signal when applied to Bayes 
Network and k Nearest Neighbour outperformed the outcomes 
of PPG signal achieving identification rates of 97.5% and 90% 
as compared to 55% and 62.5% respectively. These 
classification accuracies are as summarized in Table 1. The 
output shows a dramatic increment of the classification 
accuracy when converted from PPG to APG waveform. These 
results support the capability of APG signal to display clear 
systolic and diastolic peaks in its morphological shape and as a 
results, produces better classification outcomes. 
Furthermore, Bayes Network shows better classification 
accuracy as compared to k Nearest Neighbour due to three 
main reasons. One, Bayesian Network is capable of learning 
causal relationships, and thus can be implemented to 
understand about a problem domain and to predict the effect of 
its involvement. Two, Bayes Network has both a causal and 
probabilistic semantics where it is an ideal representation for 
the combination of prior knowledge and data. And three, 
Bayesian statistical methods in combination with Bayesian 
networks provides an effective and principled mechanism to 
avoid data over-fitting [27]. 
TABLE 1: CLASSIFICATION ACCURACIES WHEN COMPARING APG 
AND PPG SIGNALS APPLYING TWO CLASSIFIERS. 
CLASSIFIER 
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY 
APG SIGNAL 
PPG SIGNAL 
BAYES 
NETWORK 
97.5 % 
55 % 
K NEAREST 
NEIGHBOUR 
90 % 
62.5 % 
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
As a conclusion, this study provides the proof-of-concept of 
applying APG signal for biometric identification purposes. 
Based on our knowledge, biometric recognition using APG 
signal has never been reported in previous literatures. The 
identification rate of 97.5 % as compared to 55 % proves the 
capability of APG signal to classify individuals better in 
2015 International Conference on BioSignal Analysis, Processing and Systems (ICBAPS)
978-1-4799-6879-4/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
20
comparison to PPG signals. The outcome is significant as it 
suggests the feasibility and robustness of APG signals as a 
biometric modality. Additionally, APG based biometric 
identification is able to become a complementary mechanism 
for currently available biometric systems.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] UNISYS Security Index, UNISYS, (Accessed on January 25th, 2015) 
http://www.unisyssecurityindex.com/usi/ 
[2] K. A. Sidek, I. Khalil, and H. F. Jelinek. “ECG Biometric with 
Abnormal Cardiac Conditions in Remote Monitoring System”, IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 44, no. 
11, pp. 1498-1509, November 2014. 
[3] P. Spachos, G. Jiexin and D. Hatzinakos, "Feasibility study of 
photoplethysmographic signals for biometric identification", 2011 17th 
International Conference on  Digital Signal Processing (DSP), pp.1-5, 
6-8 July 2011.  
[4] M. Elgendi. “On the Analysis of Fingertip Photoplethysmogram 
Signals”, Current Cardiology Reviews, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 14-25, 2012. 
[5] M. Singh and S. Nagpal, “Features Extraction in Second Derivative of 
Finger PPG Signal: A Review.” IJCSC, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1-5, September 
2013. 
[6] M. Elgendi, M. Jonkman and F. DeBoer, "Heart Rate Variability and the 
Acceleration Plethysmogram Signals Measured at Rest", Biomedical 
Engineering Systems and Technologies: Communications in Computer 
and Information Science, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, vol. 127, pp 266-
277, 2011. 
[7] N. Nousou, S. Urase, Y. Maniwa, K. Fujimura and Y. Fukui, 
"Classification of Acceleration Plethysmogram Using Self-Organizing 
Map," International Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing and 
Communications 2006 (ISPACS '06), pp. 681-684, 12-15 Dec. 2006. 
[8] M. Rozi, M. A. M. Ali and M. B. I. Reaz, "Effects of exercise on the 
second derivative photoplethysmography (PPG) waveform," 2010 IEEE 
Asia Pacific Conference on  Circuits and Systems (APCCAS), pp. 804-
807, 6-9 Dec. 2010. 
[9] H. J. Baek, J. S. Kim, Y. S. Kim, H. B. Lee, and K. S. Park, “Second 
Derivative of Photoplethysmography for Estimating Vascular Aging.” 
6th International Special Topic Conference on ITAB, pp. 70-72, 2007. 
[10] M. Saeed, M. Villarroel, A.T. Reisner, G. Clifford, L. Lehman, G.B. 
Moody, T. Heldt, T.H. Kyaw, B.E. Moody and R.G. Mark. 
Multiparameter intelligent monitoring in intensive care II (MIMIC-II): A 
public-access ICU database. Critical Care Medicine, vol. 39, no 5, pp. 
952-960, May 2011. 
[11] A.L. Goldberger, L.A.N. Amaral, L. Glass, J.M. Hausdorff JM, P. Ch. 
Ivanov, R. G. Mark, J. E. Mietus, G. B. Moody, C. K. Peng and H. E. 
Stanley. PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and PhysioNet: Components of a 
New Research Resource for Complex Physiologic Signals. Circulation, 
vol.101,no.23,pp.215-220, 2000. 
[12] N. Friedman, D. Geiger, and M. Goldszmidt. Bayesian Network 
Classifiers. Machine Learning, Springer, vol. 29, pp. 131-161, 1997. 
[13] A G. Baptista and D. Silva, "How k-Nearest Neighbour Parameters 
Affects its Performance?", 38 JAIIO - Simposio Argentino de 
Inteligencia Artificial (ASAI 2009), pp. 95-106, 2009. 
 
 
2015 International Conference on BioSignal Analysis, Processing and Systems (ICBAPS)
978-1-4799-6879-4/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
21
